EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
7
Projected Changes in Deaths in U.S. Cities by Season
Outdoor workers spend a great deal of time exposed to 
temperature extremes, often while performing vigorous 
activities.
This figure shows the projected increase in deaths due to warming in the summer 
months (hot season, April–September), the projected decrease in deaths due to 
warming in the winter months (cold season, October–March), and the projected net 
change in deaths compared to a 1990 baseline period for the 209 U.S. cities examined, 
using the GFDL–CM3 and MIROC5 climate models (see Ch. 2: Temperature-Related 
Deaths and Illness). (Figure source: adapted from Schwartz et al. 2015)2
Changing Tolerance to Extreme Heat
Key Finding 3: An increase in population tolerance 
to extreme heat has been observed over time 
[Very High Confidence]. Changes in this tolerance 
have been associated with increased use of air 
conditioning, improved social responses, and/or 
physiological acclimatization, among other factors 
[Medium Confidence]. Expected future increases 
in this tolerance will reduce the projected increase 
in deaths from heat [Very Likely, Very High 
Confidence].
Some Populations at Greater Risk
Key Finding 4: Older adults and children have a 
higher risk of dying or becoming ill due to extreme 
heat [Very High Confidence]. People working 
outdoors, the socially isolated and economically 
disadvantaged, those with chronic illnesses, 
as well as some communities of color, are also 
especially vulnerable to death or illness [Very High 
Confidence].
  
© Fotosearch

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
8
Ragweed pollen frequently triggers hay fever 
and asthma episodes during the fall.
Changes in the climate affect the air we breathe, both indoors 
and outdoors. The changing climate has modified weather pat­
terns, which in turn have influenced the levels and location of 
outdoor air pollutants such as ground-level ozone (O3) and fine 
particulate matter. Increasing carbon dioxide (CO2) levels also 
promote the growth of plants that release airborne allergens 
(aeroallergens). Finally, these changes to outdoor air quality and 
aeroallergens also affect indoor air quality as both pollutants and 
aeroallergens infiltrate homes, schools, and other buildings. Poor 
air quality, whether outdoors or indoors, can negatively affect 
the human respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Higher pollen 
concentrations and longer pollen seasons can increase allergic 
sensitization and asthma episodes and thereby limit productivity 
at work and school. 
The air quality response to climate change can vary substantially by region across scenarios. Two downscaled global climate 
model projections using two greenhouse gas concentration pathways estimate increases in average daily maximum temperatures 
of 1.8°F to 7.2°F (1°C to 4°C) and increases of 1 to 5 parts per billion (ppb) in daily 8-hour maximum ozone in the year 2030 
relative to the year 2000 throughout the continental United States. Unless reductions in ozone precursor emissions offset the 
influence of climate change, this “climate penalty” of increased ozone concentrations due to climate change would result in tens 
to thousands of additional ozone-related premature deaths per year, shown here as incidences per year by county (see Ch. 3: 
Air Quality Impacts).  (Figure source: adapted from Fann et al. 2015)3
AIR QUALITY
IMPACTS
3
© Roy Morsch/Corbis
Projected Change in Temperature, Ozone, and Ozone-Related Premature Deaths in 2030

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
9
(Top) Dampness and mold in U.S. homes are linked to approximately 4.6 million cases of worsened asthma. (Left) Wildfires 
are a major source of airborne particulate matter, especially in the western United States during summer. Climate change has 
already led to an increased frequency of large wildfires, as well as longer durations of individual wildfires and longer wildfire 
seasons in the western United States. (Right) Nearly 6.8 million children in the United States are affected by asthma, making it 
a major chronic disease of childhood. 
Exacerbated Ozone Health Impacts 
Key Finding 1: Climate change will make it harder 
for any given regulatory approach to reduce ground-
level ozone pollution in the future as meteorological 
conditions become increasingly conducive to forming 
ozone over most of the United States [Likely, High 
Confidence]. Unless offset by additional emissions 
reductions of ozone precursors, these climate-driven 
increases in ozone will cause premature deaths, 
hospital visits, lost school days, and acute respiratory 
symptoms [Likely, High Confidence].
Increased Health Impacts from Wildfires
Key Finding 2: Wildfires emit fine particles and ozone 
precursors that in turn increase the risk of premature 
death and adverse chronic and acute cardiovascular 
and respiratory health outcomes [Likely, High 
Confidence]. Climate change is projected to increase 
the number and severity of naturally occurring wildfires 
in parts of the United States, increasing emissions of 
particulate matter and ozone precursors and resulting 
in additional adverse health outcomes [Likely, High 
Confidence].  
Worsened Allergy and Asthma Conditions 
Key Finding 3: Changes in climate, specifically rising 
temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and 
increasing concentrations of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide, are expected to contribute to increases in 
the levels of some airborne allergens and associated 
increases in asthma episodes and other allergic 
illnesses [High Confidence].
Photo credit goes here
© Stephen Welstead/LWA/Corbis
Courtesy of Bart Everson/flickr
© Erich Schlegel/Corbis

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
10
  Estimated Deaths and Billion Dollar Losses 
from Extreme Events in the U.S., 2004–2013
Heat
Waves
Tornadoes Hurricanes
Floods
Wind
Storms
Lightning
Cold
Waves
Winter
Storms
10-year Total Fatalaties 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Billion Dollar Losses
from Disasters
(2004-2013)
$392 Billion 
Hurricanes
$78 Billion 
Heat Waves/Droughts 
$46 Billion
Tornadoes/Severe Storms
$30 Billion
Flooding/Severe Storms
Climate change projections show that there will 
be continuing increases in the occurrence and 
severity of some extreme events by the end of the 
century, while for other extremes the links to cli­
mate change are more uncertain. Some regions of 
the United States have already experienced costly 
impacts—in terms of both lives lost and economic 
damages—from observed changes in the frequen­
cy, intensity, or duration of certain extreme events. 
While it is intuitive that extremes can have health 
impacts such as death or injury during an event 
(for example, drowning during floods), health 
impacts can also occur before or after an extreme 
event, as individuals may be involved in activi­
ties that put their health at risk, such as disaster 
preparation and post-event cleanup. Health risks 
may also arise long after the event, or in places 
outside the area where the event took place, as a 
result of damage to property, destruction of assets, 
loss of infrastructure and public services, social 
and economic impacts, environmental degradation, 
and other factors. 
Extreme events also pose unique health risks if 
multiple events occur simultaneously or in succes­
sion in a given location. The severity and extent 
of health effects associated with extreme events 
depend on the physical impacts of the extreme 
events themselves as well as the unique human, 
societal, and environmental circumstances at the 
time and place where events occur. 
This figure provides 10-year estimates of fatalities related to extreme events from 2004 to 2013,4 as well as estimated economic 
damages from 58 weather and climate disaster events with losses exceeding $1 billion (see Smith and Katz 2013 to understand 
how total losses were calculated).5 These statistics are indicative of the human and economic costs of extreme weather events 
over this time period. Climate change will alter the frequency, intensity, and geographic distribution of some of these extremes,1 
which has consequences for exposure to health risks from extreme events. Trends and future projections for some extremes, 
including tornadoes, lightning, and wind storms are still uncertain (see Ch. 4: Extreme Events).
IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS
ON HUMAN HEALTH
4
Estimated Deaths and Billion Dollar Losses from Extreme Events
in the United States 2004–2013

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
11
(Top) A truck gets stuck in the storm surge covering Highway 90 in Gulfport, Mississippi, during Hurricane Isaac. (Bottom) Power 
lines damaged in Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, by Hurricane Isaac. September 3, 2012.
Family farmer in drought-stressed peanut field, Unadilla,
Georgia. July 24, 2012.
Disruption of Essential Infrastructure
Key Finding 2: Many types of extreme events 
related to climate change cause disruption of 
infrastructure, including power, water, transportation, 
and communication systems, that are essential to 
maintaining access to health care and emergency 
response services and safeguarding human health 
[High Confidence].
Vulnerability to Coastal Flooding
Key Finding 3: Coastal populations with greater 
vulnerability to health impacts from coastal flooding 
include persons with disabilities or other access and 
functional needs, certain populations of color, older 
adults, pregnant women and children, low-income 
populations, and some occupational groups [High 
Confidence]. Climate change will increase exposure 
risk to coastal flooding due to increases in extreme 
precipitation and in hurricane intensity and rainfall 
rates, as well as sea level rise and the resulting 
increases in storm surge [High Confidence].
© Mike Theiss/National Geographic Creative/Corbis
© Julie Dermansky/Corbis
© Erik S. Lesser/epa/epa/Corbis
Increased Exposure to Extreme Events
Key Finding 1: Health impacts associated 
with climate-related changes in exposure to 
extreme events include death, injury, or illness; 
exacerbation of underlying medical conditions; 
and adverse effects on mental health [High 
Confidence]. Climate change will increase 
exposure risk in some regions of the United States 
due to projected increases in the frequency and/or 
intensity of drought, wildfires, and flooding related 
to extreme precipitation and hurricanes [Medium 
Confidence].

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
12
Vector-borne diseases are illnesses that are 
transmitted by vectors, which include mosqui­
toes, ticks, and fleas. These vectors can carry 
infective pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, 
and protozoa, which can be transferred from one 
host (carrier) to another. The seasonality, distri­
bution, and prevalence of vector-borne diseases 
are influenced significantly by climate factors, 
primarily high and low temperature extremes 
and precipitation patterns. 
Climate change is likely to have both short- and 
long-term effects on vector-borne disease trans­
mission and infection patterns, affecting both 
seasonal risk and broad geographic changes in 
disease occurrence over decades. While climate 
variability and climate change both alter the 
transmission of vector-borne diseases, they will 
likely interact with many other factors, including 
how pathogens adapt and change, the availabil­
ity of hosts, changing ecosystems and land use, 
demographics, human behavior, and adaptive 
capacity. These complex interactions make it 
difficult to predict the effects of climate change 
on vector-borne diseases.
In the eastern United States, Lyme disease is transmitted to 
humans primarily by blacklegged (deer) ticks. 
© Science Stills/ARS/Visuals Unlimited/Corbis
VECTOR-BORNE 
DISEASES
5
Maps show the reported cases of Lyme disease in 2001 and 2014 for the areas of the country where Lyme disease is most 
common (the Northeast and Upper Midwest). Both the distribution and the numbers of cases have increased (see Ch. 5: Vector-
Borne Diseases). (Figure source: adapted from CDC 2015)6 
© iStockPhoto.com/powerofforever
2001
2014
Changes in Lyme Disease Case Report Distribution

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
13
Changing Distributions of Vectors and 
Vector-Borne Diseases
Key Finding 1: Climate change is expected to 
alter the geographic and seasonal distributions of 
existing vectors and vector-borne diseases [Likely, 
High Confidence].
Earlier Tick Activity and Northward Range 
Expansion
Key Finding 2: Ticks capable of carrying the 
bacteria that cause Lyme disease and other 
pathogens will show earlier seasonal activity and 
a generally northward expansion in response to 
increasing temperatures associated with climate 
change [Likely, High Confidence]. Longer seasonal 
activity and expanding geographic range of these 
ticks will increase the risk of human exposure to 
ticks [Likely, Medium Confidence].
Changing Mosquito-Borne Disease 
Dynamics
Key Finding 3: Rising temperatures, changing 
precipitation patterns, and a higher frequency 
of some extreme weather events associated with 
climate change will influence the distribution, 
abundance, and prevalence of infection in the 
mosquitoes that transmit West Nile virus and 
other pathogens by altering habitat availability and 
mosquito and viral reproduction rates [Very Likely, 
High Confidence]. Alterations in the distribution, 
abundance, and infection rate of mosquitoes will 
influence human exposure to bites from infected 
mosquitoes, which is expected to alter risk for 
human disease [Very Likely, Medium Confidence].
Emergence of New Vector-Borne 
Pathogens
Key Finding 4: Vector-borne pathogens are 
expected to emerge or reemerge due to the 
interactions of climate factors with many other 
drivers, such as changing land-use patterns 
[Likely, High Confidence]. The impacts to human 
disease, however, will be limited by the adaptive 
capacity of human populations, such as vector 
control practices or personal protective measures 
[Likely, High Confidence].
Birds such as the house finch are the natural host of West 
Nile virus. Humans can be infected from a bite of a mosquito 
that has previously bitten an infected bird. 
© CDC/Science Faction/Corbis
© Pete Oxford/Minden Pictures/Corbis
© iStockPhoto.com/leekris

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
14
Precipitation and temperature changes affect fresh and marine water quantity and quality primarily through urban, 
rural, and agriculture runoff. This runoff in turn affects human exposure to water-related illnesses primarily through 
contamination of drinking water, recreational water, and fish or shellfish (see Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness).
Across most of the United States, climate change 
is expected to affect fresh and marine water 
resources in ways that will increase people’s 
exposure to water-related contaminants that cause 
illness. Water-related illnesses include waterborne 
diseases caused by pathogens, such as bacteria, 
viruses, and protozoa. Water-related illnesses 
are also caused by toxins produced by certain 
harmful algae and cyanobacteria and by chemicals 
introduced into the environment by human 
activities. Exposure occurs through ingestion, 
inhalation, or direct contact with contaminated 
drinking or recreational water and through 
consumption of contaminated fish and shellfish. 
Factors related to climate change—including 
temperature, precipitation and related runoff, 
hurricanes, and storm surge—affect the growth, 
survival, spread, and virulence or toxicity of agents 
(causes) of water-related illness. Whether or not 
illness results from exposure to contaminated 
water, fish, or shellfish is dependent on a complex 
set of factors, including human behavior and social 
determinants of health that may affect a person’s 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. 
Water resource, public health, and environmental 
agencies in the United States provide many public 
health safeguards to reduce risk of exposure and 
illness even if water becomes contaminated. These 
include water quality monitoring, drinking water 
treatment standards and practices, beach closures, 
and issuing advisories for boiling drinking water 
and harvesting shellfish.
Links between Climate Change, Water Quantity and 
Quality, and Human Exposure to Water-Related Illness
CLIMATE IMPACTS ON
WATER-RELATED ILLNESSES
6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
15
Seasonal and Geographic Changes in 
Waterborne Illness Risk
Key Finding 1: Increases in water temperatures 
associated with climate change will alter the 
seasonal windows of growth and the geographic 
range of suitable habitat for freshwater toxin-
producing harmful algae [Very Likely, High 
Confidence], certain naturally occurring Vibrio 
bacteria [Very Likely, Medium Confidence], and 
marine toxin-producing harmful algae [Likely, 
Medium Confidence]. These changes will increase 
the risk of exposure to waterborne pathogens and 
algal toxins that can cause a variety of illnesses 
[Medium Confidence].
Runoff from Extreme Precipitation 
Increases Exposure Risk
Key Finding 2:  Runoff from more frequent 
and intense extreme precipitation events will 
increasingly compromise recreational waters, 
shellfish harvesting waters, and sources of 
drinking water through increased introduction of 
pathogens and prevalence of toxic algal blooms 
[High Confidence]. As a result, the risk of human 
exposure to agents of water-related illness will 
increase [Medium Confidence].
Water Infrastructure Failure
Key Finding 3: Increases in some extreme weather 
events and storm surges will increase the risk 
that infrastructure for drinking water, wastewater, 
and stormwater will fail due to either damage 
or exceedance of system capacity, especially in 
areas with aging infrastructure [High Confidence]. 
As a result, the risk of exposure to water-related 
pathogens, chemicals, and algal toxins will 
increase in recreational and shellfish harvesting 
waters, and in drinking water where treatment 
barriers break down [Medium Confidence].
Red tide bloom, Hood Canal, Puget Sound, Washington State.
Young women walk through floodwater in the historic district 
of Charleston, South Carolina, as Hurricane Joaquin passes 
offshore. October 4, 2015.
© Don Paulson/SuperStock/Corbis
© Richard Ellis/Corbis

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
16
The food system involves a network of interactions with our physical and biological environments as food 
moves from production to consumption, or from “farm to table.” Rising CO2 and climate change will affect the 
quality and distribution of food, with subsequent effects on food safety and nutrition (see Ch. 7: Food Safety).
Farm to Table
The Potential Interactions of Rising CO2 and Climate Change on Food Safety
A safe and nutritious food supply is a vital com­
ponent of food security. The impacts of climate 
change on food production, prices, and trade for 
the United States and globally have been widely 
examined, including in the recent report “Climate 
Change, Global Food Security, and the U.S. Food 
System.”7 An overall finding of that report was 
that “climate change is very likely to affect global, 
regional, and local food security by disrupting food 
availability, decreasing access to food, and making 
utilization more difficult.” 
This chapter focuses on some of the less reported 
aspects of food security, specifically the impacts 
of climate change on food safety, nutrition, and 
distribution. There are two overarching means by 
which increasing carbon dioxide (CO2) and climate 
change alter safety, nutrition, and distribution of 
food. The first is associated with rising global tem­
peratures and the subsequent changes in weather 
patterns and extreme climate events. Current and 
anticipated changes in climate and the physical 
environment have consequences for contamina­
tion, spoilage, and the disruption of food distri­
bution. The second pathway is through the direct 
CO2 “fertilization” effect on plant photosynthesis. 
Higher concentrations of CO2 stimulate growth and 
carbohydrate production in some plants, but can 
lower the levels of protein and essential minerals 
in a number of widely consumed crops, including 
wheat, rice, and potatoes, with potentially negative 
implications for human nutrition.
FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION,
AND DISTRIBUTION
7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
17
Increased Risk of Foodborne Illness
Key Finding 1: Climate change, including 
rising temperatures and changes in weather 
extremes, is expected to increase the exposure 
of food to certain pathogens and toxins [Likely, 
High Confidence]. This will increase the risk 
of negative health impacts [Likely, Medium 
Confidence], but actual incidence of foodborne 
illness will depend on the efficacy of practices 
that safeguard food in the United States [High 
Confidence]. 
Chemical Contaminants in the Food 
Chain
Key Finding 2: Climate change will increase 
human exposure to chemical contaminants in 
food through several pathways [Likely, Medium 
Confidence]. Elevated sea surface temperatures 
will lead to greater accumulation of mercury 
in seafood [Likely, Medium Confidence], 
while increases in extreme weather events will 
introduce contaminants into the food chain 
[Likely, Medium Confidence]. Rising carbon 
dioxide concentrations and climate change 
will alter incidence and distribution of pests, 
parasites, and microbes [Very Likely, High 
Confidence], leading to increases in the use of 
pesticides and veterinary drugs [Likely, Medium 
Confidence].
Rising Carbon Dioxide Lowers Nutritional 
Value of Food
Key Finding 3: The nutritional value of 
agriculturally important food crops, such as 
wheat and rice, will decrease as rising levels of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide continue to reduce the 
concentrations of protein and essential minerals in 
most plant species [Very Likely, High Confidence].
Extreme Weather Limits Access to Safe 
Foods
Key Finding 4: Increases in the frequency or 
intensity of some extreme weather events 
associated with climate change will increase 
disruptions of food distribution by damaging 
existing infrastructure or slowing food shipments 
[Likely, High Confidence]. These impediments lead 
to increased risk for food damage, spoilage, or 
contamination, which will limit availability of and 
access to safe and nutritious food depending on 
the extent of disruption and the resilience of food 
distribution infrastructure [Medium Confidence].
(Left) The risk of foodborne illness is higher when food is prepared outdoors. (Right) Crop dusting of a corn field in Iowa.
© Hill Street Studios/Blend Images/Corbis
© Lucas Payne/AgStock Images/Corbis

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
18
Children are at particular risk for distress, anxiety, and 
other adverse mental health effects in the aftermath of 
an extreme event.
The effects of global climate change on mental 
health and well-being are integral parts of the overall 
climate-related human health impacts. Mental health 
consequences of climate change range from minimal 
stress and distress symptoms to clinical disorders, 
such as anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress, 
and suicidality. Other consequences include effects 
on the everyday life, perceptions, and experiences of 
individuals and communities attempting to under­
stand and respond appropriately to climate change 
and its implications. The mental health and well-be­
ing consequences of climate change related impacts 
rarely occur in isolation, but often interact with other 
social and environmental stressors. The interactive 
and cumulative nature of climate change effects on 
health, mental health, and well-being are critical 
factors in understanding the overall consequences of 
climate change on human health.
The Impact of Climate Change on Physical, Mental, and Community Health
At the center of the diagram are human figures representing adults, children, older adults, and people with disabilities. The left 
circle depicts climate impacts including air quality, wildfire, sea level rise and storm surge, heat, storms, and drought. The right 
circle shows the three interconnected health domains that will be affected by climate impacts: Medical and Physical Health, 
Mental Health, and Community Health (see Ch. 8: Mental Health). (Figure source: adapted from Clayton et al. 2014)7
MENTAL HEALTH AND 
WELL-BEING
8
© Aurora/Aurora Photo/Corbis

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
19
(Top) Rescue worker receives hug from Galveston, TX, 
resident after Hurricane Ike, September 2008. (Bottom) 
People experience the threat of climate change through 
frequent media coverage.
Residents and volunteers in the Rockaways section of 
Queens in New York City filter through clothes and food 
supplies from donors following Superstorm Sandy. 
November 3, 2012.
Exposure to Disasters Results in Mental 
Health Consequences
Key Finding 1: Many people exposed to 
climate-related or weather-related disasters 
experience stress and serious mental health 
consequences. Depending on the type of the 
disaster, these consequences include post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, 
and general anxiety, which often occur at the 
same time [Very High Confidence]. The majority 
of affected people recover over time, although 
a significant proportion of exposed individuals 
develop chronic psychological dysfunction [High 
Confidence].	
Specific Groups of People Are at 
Higher Risk 
Key Finding 2: Specific groups of people are at 
higher risk for distress and other adverse mental 
health consequences from exposure to climate-
related or weather-related disasters. These groups 
include children, the elderly, women (especially 
pregnant and post-partum women), people with 
preexisting mental illness, the economically 
disadvantaged, the homeless, and first responders 
[High Confidence]. Communities that rely on the 
natural environment for sustenance and livelihood, 
as well as populations living in areas most 
susceptible to specific climate change events, 
are at increased risk for adverse mental health 
outcomes [High Confidence].
Climate Change Threats Result in Mental 
Health Consequences and Social Impacts
Key Finding 3: Many people will experience adverse 
mental health outcomes and social impacts from 
the threat of climate change, the perceived direct 
experience of climate change, and changes to 
one’s local environment [High Confidence]. Media 
and popular culture representations of climate 
change influence stress responses and mental 
health and well-being [Medium Confidence].
Extreme Heat Increases Risks for People 
with Mental Illness
Key Finding 4: People with mental illness are at 
higher risk for poor physical and mental health 
due to extreme heat [High Confidence]. Increases 
in extreme heat will increase the risk of disease 
and death for people with mental illness, including 
elderly populations and those taking prescription 
medications that impair the body’s ability to 
regulate temperature [High Confidence].
© U.S. Air Force/Staff Sgt. James L. Harper Jr.
Courtesy of flickr/flash.pro
© Alec McClure/Demotix/Corbis

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
20
Determinants of Vulnerability
Defining the determinants of vulnerability to health impacts associated with climate change, including 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity (see Ch. 9: Populations of Concern). (Figure source: adapted 
from Turner et al. 2003)8
Climate change is already causing, and is expected 
to continue to cause, a range of health impacts 
that vary across different population groups in 
the United States. The vulnerability of any given 
group is a function of its sensitivity to climate 
change related health risks, its exposure to those 
risks, and its capacity for responding to or coping 
with climate variability and change. Vulnerable 
groups of people, described here as populations 
of concern, include those with low income, some 
communities of color, immigrant groups (including 
those with limited English proficiency), Indige­
nous peoples, children and pregnant women, older 
adults, vulnerable occupational groups, persons 
with disabilities, and persons with preexisting or 
chronic medical conditions. Characterizations of 
vulnerability should consider how populations of 
concern experience disproportionate, multiple, 
and complex risks to their health and well-being in 
response to climate change.
Vulnerability Varies Over Time and Is 
Place-Specific
Key Finding 1: Across the United States, people 
and communities differ in their exposure, their 
inherent sensitivity, and their adaptive capacity to 
respond to and cope with climate change related 
health threats [Very High Confidence]. Vulnerability 
to climate change varies across time and location, 
across communities, and among individuals within 
communities [Very High Confidence].
Health Impacts Vary with Age and Life 
Stage
Key Finding 2: People experience different inherent 
sensitivities to the impacts of climate change at 
different ages and life stages [High Confidence]. 
For example, the very young and the very old are 
particularly sensitive to climate-related health 
impacts. 
POPULATIONS OF
CONCERN
9

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
21
Social Determinants of Health Interact 
with Climate Factors to Affect Health Risk
Key Finding 3: Climate change threatens the 
health of people and communities by affecting 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity [High 
Confidence]. Social determinants of health, 
such as those related to socioeconomic factors 
and health disparities, may amplify, moderate, 
or otherwise influence climate-related health 
effects, particularly when these factors occur 
simultaneously or close in time or space [High 
Confidence]. 
Mapping Tools and Vulnerability Indices 
Identify Climate Health Risks 
Key Finding 4: The use of geographic data and 
tools allows for more sophisticated mapping of risk 
factors and social vulnerabilities to identify and 
protect specific locations and groups of people 
[High Confidence].
(Left) Persons with disabilities often rely on medical 
equipment (such as portable oxygen) that requires an 
uninterrupted source of electricity. (Right) Climate-related 
exposures may lead to adverse pregnancy and newborn 
health outcomes.
© JGI/Tom Grill/Blend Images/Corbis
© iStockPhoto.com/ozqurkeser
Because of existing vulnerabilities, Indigenous people, especially those who are dependent on the environment for sustenance 
or who live in geographically isolated or impoverished communities, are likely to experience greater exposure and lower 
resilience to climate-related health effects.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
22
1.	
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 
2.	
Schwartz, J.D., M. Lee, P.L. Kinney, S. Yang, D. Mills, M. 
Sarofim, R. Jones, R. Streeter, A. St. Juliana, J. Peers, and 
R.M. Horton, 2015: Projections of temperature-attributable 
premature deaths in 209 U.S. cities using a cluster-based 
Poisson approach. Environmental Health, 14.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/s12940-015-0071-2 
3.	
Fann, N., C.G. Nolte, P. Dolwick, T.L. Spero, A. Curry 
Brown, S. Phillips, and S. Anenberg, 2015: The geographic 
distribution and economic value of climate change-related 
ozone health impacts in the United States in 2030. Journal 
of the Air & Waste Management Association, 65, 570-580. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2014.996270 
4.	
NOAA, 2015: Natural Hazard Statistics: Weather Fatalities. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Nation­
al Weather Service, Office of Climate, Water, and Weather 
Services. http://www.nws.noaa.gov/om/hazstats.shtml
5.	
Smith, A.B. and R.W. Katz, 2013: US billion-dollar weath­
er and climate disasters: Data sources, trends, accuracy 
and biases. Natural Hazards, 67, 387-410.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-013-0566-5 
6.	
CDC, 2015: Lyme Disease: Data and Statistics: Maps- 
Reported Cases of Lyme Disease – United States, 2001-
2014. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://
www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/
7.	
Brown, M.E., J.M. Antle, P. Backlund, E.R. Carr, W.E. 
Easterling, M.K. Walsh, C. Ammann, W. Attavanich, C.B. 
Barrett, M.F. Bellemare, V. Dancheck, C. Funk, K. Grace, 
J.S.I. Ingram, H. Jiang, H. Maletta, T. Mata, A. Murray, M. 
Ngugi, D. Ojima, B. O’Neill, and C. Tebaldi, 2015: Climate 
Change, Global Food Security, and the U.S. Food System. 
146 pp. U.S. Global Change Research Program. http://www.
usda.gov/oce/climate_change/FoodSecurity2015Assess­
ment/FullAssessment.pdf 
References
8.	
Clayton, S., C.M. Manning, and C. Hodge, 2014: Beyond 
Storms & Droughts: The Psychological Impacts of Cli­
mate Change. 51 pp. American Psychological Association 
and ecoAmerica, Washington, D.C. http://ecoamerica.org/
wp-content/uploads/2014/06/eA_Beyond_Storms_and_
Droughts_Psych_Impacts_of_Climate_Change.pdf
9.	
Turner, B.L., R.E. Kasperson, P.A. Matson, J.J. McCarthy, 
R.W. Corell, L. Christensen, N. Eckley, J.X. Kasperson, A. 
Luers, M.L. Martello, C. Polsky, A. Pulsipher, and A. Schiller, 
2003: A framework for vulnerability analysis in sustainability 
science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 
8074-8079.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1231335100 
End

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
23
© Richard T. Nowitz/Corbis 

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
24
© iStockPhoto.com/ © Ints Vikmanis 

INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE 
CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
1
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Lead Authors
John Balbus
National Institutes of Health
Allison Crimmins* 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Janet L. Gamble
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Contributing Authors
David R. Easterling
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Kenneth E. Kunkel
Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites–North Carolina 
Shubhayu Saha
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Marcus C. Sarofim
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Recommended Citation: Balbus, J., A. Crimmins, J.L. Gamble, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, S. Saha, and M.C. Sarofim, 2016: Ch. 1: 
Introduction: Climate Change and Human Health. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific 
Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 25–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0VX0DFW
*Chapter Coordinator

26
INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE 
AND HUMAN HEALTH
1
Human health has always been influenced by climate and weather. Changes in climate and climate 
variability, particularly changes in weather extremes, affect the environment that provides us with clean 
air, food, water, shelter, and security. Climate change, together with other natural and human-made health 
stressors, threatens human health and well-being in numerous ways. Some of these health impacts are 
already being experienced in the United States. 
Given that the impacts of climate change are projected to increase over the next century, certain existing 
health threats will intensify and new health threats may emerge. Connecting our understanding of how 
climate is changing with an understanding of how those changes may affect human health can inform 
decisions about mitigating (reducing) the amount of future climate change, suggest priorities for protecting 
public health, and help identify research needs.
1.1	 Our Changing Climate  
Observed Climate Change
The fact that the Earth has warmed over the last century is 
unequivocal. Multiple observations of air and ocean tempera­
tures, sea level, and snow and ice have shown these changes to 
be unprecedented over decades to millennia. Human influence 
has been the dominant cause of this observed warming.1 The 
2014 U.S. National Climate Assessment (2014 NCA) found that 
rising temperatures, the resulting increases in the frequency or 
intensity of some extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and 
melting snow and ice are already disrupting people’s lives and 
damaging some sectors of the U.S. economy.2 
The concepts of climate and weather are often confused. 
Weather is the state of the atmosphere at any given time and 
place. Weather patterns vary greatly from year to year and 
from region to region. Familiar aspects of weather include 
temperature, precipitation, clouds, and wind that people ex­
perience throughout the course of a day. Severe weather con­
ditions include hurricanes, tornadoes, blizzards, and droughts. 
Climate is the average weather conditions that persist over 
multiple decades or longer. While the weather can change in 
minutes or hours, identifying a change in climate has required 
observations over a time period of decades to centuries or lon­
ger. Climate change encompasses both increases and decreas­
es in temperature as well as shifts in precipitation, changing 
risks of certain types of severe weather events, and changes to 
other features of the climate system.
Observed changes in climate and weather differ at local and 
regional scales (Figure 1). Some climate and weather changes 
already observed in the United States include:2, 3
•	 U.S. average temperature has increased by 1.3°F to 1.9°F 
since record keeping began in 1895; most of this increase 
has occurred since about 1970. The first decade of the 
2000s (2000–2009) was the warmest on record throughout 
the United States. 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
27
•	 Average U.S. precipitation has increased since 1900, but 
some areas have experienced increases greater than the na­
tional average, and some areas have experienced decreases. 
•	 Heavy downpours are increasing nationally, especially over 
the last three to five decades. The largest increases are in 
the Midwest and Northeast, where floods have also been 
increasing. Figure 2 shows how the annual number of heavy 
downpours, defined as extreme two-day precipitation 
events, for the contiguous United States has increased, 
particularly between the 1950s and the 2000s. 
•	 Drought has increased in the West. Over the last de­
cade, the Southwest has experienced the most persistent 
droughts since record keeping began in 1895.4 Changes 
in precipitation and runoff, combined with changes in 
consumption and withdrawal, have reduced surface and 
groundwater supplies in many areas.
•	 There have been changes in some other types of extreme 
weather events over the last several decades. Heat waves 
have become more frequent and intense, especially in the 
West. Cold waves have become less frequent and intense 
across the nation. 
Major U.S. Climate Trends
Figure 1: Major U.S. national and regional climate trends. Shaded areas are the U.S. regions defined in the 2014 NCA.2, 4
Change in Number of Extreme 
Precipitation Events
Figure 2: Time series of 5-year averages of the number of 
extreme 2-day duration precipitation events, averaged over the 
United States from 1900 to 2014. The number is expressed as 
the percent difference from the average for the entire period. 
This is based on 726 stations that have precipitation data for 
at least 90% of the days in the period. An event is considered 
extreme if the precipitation amount exceeds a threshold for a 
once-per-year recurrence. (Figure source: adapted from Melillo 
et al. 2014)2

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
28
•	 The intensity, frequency, and duration of North Atlantic hur­
ricanes, as well as the frequency of the strongest (category 
4 and 5) hurricanes, have all increased since the early 1980s. 
The relative contributions of human and natural causes to 
these increases remain uncertain. 
Projected Climate Change
Projections of future climate conditions are based on results 
from climate models—sophisticated computer programs that 
simulate the behavior of the Earth’s climate system. These 
climate models are used to project how the climate system is 
expected to change under different possible scenarios. These 
scenarios describe future changes in atmospheric greenhouse 
gas concentrations, land use, other human influences on 
climate, and natural factors. The most recent set of coordi­
nated climate model simulations use a set of scenarios called 
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), which de­
scribe four possible trajectories in greenhouse gas concentra­
tions.1 Actual future greenhouse gas concentrations, and the 
resulting amount of future climate change, will still largely be 
determined by choices society makes about emissions.2 The 
RCPs, and the temperature increases associated with these 
scenarios, are described in more detail in Appendix 1: Techni­
cal Support Document and in the 2014 NCA.3, 5, 6 
Some of the projected changes in climate in the United States 
as described in the 2014 NCA are listed below:2, 3 
•	 Temperatures in the United States are expected to continue 
to rise. This temperature rise has not been, and will not 
be, uniform across the country or over time (Figure 3, top 
panels).
•	 Increases are also projected for extreme temperature condi­
tions. The temperature of both the hottest day and coldest 
night of the year are projected to increase (Figure 4, top 
panels). 
•	 More winter and spring precipitation is projected for the 
northern United States, and less for the Southwest, over this 
century (Figure 3, bottom panels).
•	 Increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme pre­
cipitation events are projected for all U.S. areas (Figure 4, 
bottom panels).
•	 Short-term (seasonal or shorter) droughts are expected to 
intensify in most U.S. regions. Longer-term droughts are 
expected to intensify in large areas of the Southwest, the 
southern Great Plains, and the Southeast. Trends in reduced 
surface and groundwater supplies in many areas are expect­
ed to continue, increasing the likelihood of water shortages 
for many uses.
Projected Changes in Temperature and Precipitation by Mid-Century
Figure 3: Projected changes in annual average 
temperature (top) and precipitation (bottom) for 2021–
2050 (left) and 2041–2070 (right) with respect to the 
average for 1971–2000 for the RCP6.0 scenario. 
The RCP6.0 pathway projects an average global 
temperature increase of 5.2°F in 2100 over the 
1901–1960 global average temperature (the RCPs 
are described in more detail in Appendix 1: Technical 
Support Document). Temperature increases in the 
United States for this scenario (top panels) are in 
the 2°F to 3°F range for 2021 to 2050 and 2°F to 4°F 
for 2041 to 2070. This means that the increase in 
temperature projected in the United States over the 
next 50 years under this scenario would be larger 
than the 1°F to 2°F increase in temperature that has 
already been observed over the previous century. 
Precipitation is projected to decrease in the Southwest 
and increase in the Northeast (bottom panels). These 
projected changes are statistically significant (95% 
confidence) in small portions of the Northeast, as 
indicated by the hatching. (Figure source: adapted 
from Sun et al. 2015)54 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
29
•	 Heat waves are projected to become more intense, and cold 
waves less intense, everywhere in the United States. 
•	 Hurricane-associated storm intensity and rainfall rates are 
projected to increase as the climate continues to warm.  
1.2	 How Does Climate Change Affect Health?
The influences of weather and climate on human health are 
significant and varied. They range from the clear threats of 
temperature extremes and severe storms to connections that 
may seem less obvious. For example, weather and climate 
affect the survival, distribution, and behavior of mosquitoes, 
ticks, and rodents that carry diseases like West Nile virus or 
Lyme disease. Climate and weather can also affect water and 
food quality in particular areas, with implications for human 
health. In addition, the effects of global climate change on 
mental health and well-being are integral parts of the overall 
climate-related human health impact.
A useful approach to understand how climate change affects 
health is to consider specific exposure pathways and how they 
can lead to human disease. The concept of exposure pathways 
is adapted from its use in chemical risk assessment, and in this 
context describes the main routes by which climate change af­
fects health (see Figure 5). Exposure pathways differ over time 
and in different locations, and climate change related expo­
sures can affect different people and different communities to 
different degrees. While often assessed individually, exposure 
to multiple climate change threats can occur simultaneously, 
resulting in compounding or cascading health impacts. Climate 
change threats may also accumulate over time, leading to 
longer-term changes in resilience and health.
Whether or not a person is exposed to a health threat or 
suffers illness or other adverse health outcomes from that 
exposure depends on a complex set of vulnerability factors. 
Vulnerability is the tendency or predisposition to be adversely 
affected by climate-related health effects, and encompasses 
three elements: exposure, sensitivity or susceptibility to harm, 
and the capacity to adapt or to cope (see also Figure 1 in Ch. 
9: Populations of Concern). Because multiple disciplines use 
these terms differently and multiple definitions exist in the 
literature, the distinctions between them are not always clear.7 
All three of these elements can change over time and are 
place- and system-specific.8 In the context of this report, we 
define the three elements of vulnerability as follows (defini­
tions adapted from IPCC 2014 and NRC 2012)9, 10
•	 Exposure is contact between a person and one or more 
biological, psychosocial, chemical, or physical stressors, 
including stressors affected by climate change. Contact may 
occur in a single instance or repeatedly over time, and may 
occur in one location or over a wider geographic area.
•	 Sensitivity is the degree to which people or communities 
are affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate 
variability or change. 
Projected Changes in the Hottest/Coldest and Wettest/Driest Day of the Year
Figure 4: Projected changes in several climate 
variables for 2046–2065 with respect to the 1981–
2000 average for the RCP6.0 scenario. These include 
the coldest night of the year (top left) and the hottest 
day of the year (top right). By the middle of this 
century, the coldest night of the year is projected to 
warm by 6°F to 10°F over most of the country, with 
slightly smaller changes in the south. The warmest 
day of the year is projected to be 4°F to 6°F warmer 
in most areas. Also shown are projections of the 
wettest day of the year (bottom left) and the annual 
longest consecutive dry day spell (bottom right). 
Extreme precipitation is projected to increase, with 
an average change of 5% to 15% in the precipitation 
falling on the wettest day of the year. The length of 
the annual longest dry spell is projected to increase 
in most areas, but these changes are small: less than 
two days in most areas. (Figure source: adapted from 
Sun et al. 2015)54 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
30
•	 Adaptive capacity is the ability of communities, institutions, 
or people to adjust to potential hazards, to take advantage 
of opportunities, or to respond to consequences. A related 
term, resilience, is the ability to prepare and plan for, ab­
sorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse 
events.
Vulnerability, and the three components of vulnerability, are 
factors that operate at multiple levels, from the individual and 
community to the country level, and affect all people to some 
degree.8 For an individual, these factors include human behav­
ioral choices and the degree to which that person is vulnerable 
based on his or her level of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive 
capacity. Vulnerability is also influenced by social determinants 
of health (see Ch. 9 Populations of Concern), including those 
that affect a person’s adaptive capacity, such as social capital 
and social cohesion (for example, the strength of interpersonal 
networks and social patterns in a community). 
At a larger community or societal scale, health outcomes are 
strongly influenced by adaptive capacity factors, including 
those related to the natural and built environments (for exam­
ple, the state of infrastructure), governance and management 
(health-protective surveillance programs, regulations and 
enforcement, or community health programs), and institutions 
(organizations operating at all levels to form a national public 
health system).11, 12 For example, water resource, public health, 
and environmental agencies in the United States provide many 
public health safeguards, such as monitoring water quality 
and issuing advisories to reduce risk of exposure and illness 
if water becomes contaminated. Some aspects of climate 
change health impacts in the United States may therefore be 
F P O
Climate Change and Health
Figure 5: Conceptual diagram illustrating the exposure pathways by which climate change affects human health. Exposure pathways 
exist within the context of other factors that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that 
influence vulnerability for individuals are shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. 
Key factors that influence vulnerability at larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and management, and 
institutions, are shown in the left box. All of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s vulnerability through 
changes in exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change.

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
31
mediated by factors like strong social capital, fully function­
al governance/management, and institutions that maintain 
the Nation’s generally high level of adaptive capacity. On the 
other hand, the evidence base regarding the effectiveness of 
public health interventions in a climate change context is still 
relatively weak.13 Current levels of adaptive capacity may not 
be sufficient to address multiple impacts that occur simulta­
neously or in close succession, 
or impacts of climate change 
that result in unprecedented 
damages.2, 12 
The three components of 
vulnerability (exposure, sensi­
tivity, and adaptive capacity) 
are associated with social and 
demographic factors, including 
level of wealth and education, as well as other characteristics 
of people and places, such as the condition of infrastructure 
and extent of ecosystem degradation. For example, pover­
ty can leave people more exposed to climate and weather 
threats, increase sensitivity because of associations with high­
er rates of illness and nutritional deficits, and limit people’s 
adaptive capacity. As another example, people living in a city 
with degraded coastal ecosystems and inadequate water and 
wastewater infrastructure may be at greater risk of health 
consequences from severe storms. Figure 5 demonstrates the 
interactions among climate drivers, health impacts, and other 
factors that influence people’s vulnerability to health impacts. 
We are already experiencing changes in the frequency, 
severity, and even the location of some weather and climate 
phenomena, including extreme temperatures, heavy rains 
and droughts, and some other kinds of severe weather, and 
these changes are projected to continue. This means that 
areas already experiencing health-threatening weather and 
climate phenomena, such as severe heat or hurricanes, are 
likely to experience worsening impacts, such as even higher 
temperatures and increased storm intensity, rainfall rates, and 
storm surge. It also means that 
some areas will experience new 
climate-related health threats. 
For example, areas previously un­
affected by toxic algal blooms or 
waterborne diseases because of 
cooler water temperatures may 
face these hazards in the future 
as increasing water tempera­
tures allow the organisms that 
cause these health risks to thrive. Even areas that currently 
experience these health threats may see a shift in the timing 
of the seasons that pose the greatest risk to human health.
Climate change can therefore affect human health in two main 
ways: first, by changing the severity or frequency of health 
problems that are already affected by climate or weather fac­
tors; and second, by creating unprecedented or unanticipated 
health problems or health threats in places where they have 
not previously occurred. 
1.3	 Our Changing Health
In order to understand how climate change creates or exacer­
bates health problems, assessments of climate change health 
impacts must start with what is known about the current state 
and observed trends in a wide array of health conditions. In 
addition, because preexisting health conditions, socioeconom­
ic status, and life stage all contribute to vulnerability to cli­
mate-related and weather-related health effects, assessments 
of climate change health impacts should be informed by pro­
jected changes in these factors. In cases where people’s health 
or socioeconomic status is getting worse, climate change may 
accentuate the health burdens associated with those worsen­
ing trends. Conversely, in cases where people’s health or so­
cioeconomic status is improving, the effect of climate change 
may be to slow or reduce that improvement. Where the state 
of scientific understanding allows, the inclusion of projected 
trends in health and socioeconomic conditions into models of 
climate change impacts on health can provide useful insights 
into these interactions between non-climate factors and cli­
mate change effects.
Demographic and Socioeconomic Trends
The United States is in the midst of several significant demo­
graphic changes: the population is aging, growing in number, 
becoming more ethnically diverse, and demonstrating greater 
disparities between the wealthy and the poor. Immigration is 
Current levels of adaptive capacity may not 
be sufficient to address multiple impacts 
that occur simultaneously or in close succession, 
or impacts of climate change that result 
in unprecedented damages.
Storm-damaged home after Hurricane Sandy.

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
32
having a major influence on both the size and age distribution 
of the population.14 Each of these demographic trends has 
implications for climate change related human health impacts 
(see Ch. 9: Populations of Concern). Some of these trends and 
projections are summarized below:
Trends in population growth
•	 The total U.S. population has more than doubled since 1950, 
from 151,325,798 persons in 1950 to 308,745,538 in 2010.15 
•	 The Census Bureau projects that the U.S. population will grow 
to almost 400 million by 2050 (from estimates of about 320 
million in 2014).16
Trends in the elderly population
•	 The nation’s older adult population (ages 65 and older) will 
nearly double in number from 2015 through 2050, from 
approximately 48 million to 88 million.17 Of those 88 million 
older adults, a little under 19 million will be 85 years of age 
and older.18 
Trends in racial and ethnic diversity
•	 As the United States becomes more diverse, the aggregate 
minority population is projected to become the majority by 
2042.17 The non-Hispanic or non-Latino White population will 
increase, but more slowly than other racial groups. Non-His­
panic Whites are projected to become a minority by 2050.19
•	 Projections for 2050 suggest that nearly 19% of the popula­
tion will be immigrants, compared with 12% in 2005.19
•	 The Hispanic population is projected to nearly double from 
12.5% of the U.S. population in 2000 to 24.6% in 2050.20
Trends in economic disparity
•	 Income inequality rose and then stabilized during the last 
30 years, and is projected to resume rising over the next 20 
years, though at a somewhat slower overall rate that declines 
to near zero by 2035.21 For example, the Gini coefficient, a 
measure of income inequality, is estimated to have risen by 
18% between 1984 and 2000, and is projected to rise by an 
additional 17% for all workers between 2009 and 2035.21 
•	 America’s communities of color have disproportionately 
higher poverty rates and lower income levels. While racial 
disparities in household wealth were higher in the late 1980s 
than now, trends in more recent years have been toward 
greater inequality. The ratio of the median net household 
worth of White, non-Hispanic versus non-White or Hispanic 
households increased from 6.0 to 7.8 between 2007 and 
2013.22 In 2009, 25.8% of non-Hispanic Blacks and 25.3% of 
Hispanics had incomes below the poverty level as compared 
to 9.4% of non-Hispanic Whites and 12.5% of Asian Ameri­
cans.23 In 2014, the median income level for a non-Hispanic 
Black household was approximately $35,000, $25,000 lower 
than a non-Hispanic White household.24 
Population growth and migration in the United States may place 
more people at risk of the health impacts of climate change, 
especially as more people are located in and around vulnerable 
areas, such as coastal, low-lying, or flood-prone zones;25 densely 
populated urban areas;26 and drought-stricken or wildfire-prone 
regions. Increases in racial and ethnic diversity and in the num­
ber of persons living near the poverty line may increase the risk 
of health impacts from climate change. Economic disparity can 
make it difficult for some populations to respond to dangerous 
weather conditions, especially when evacuation is necessary or 
when the aftermath requires rebuilding of homes and business­
es not covered by home or property insurance. 
Trends in Health Status 
As a nation, trends in the population’s health are mixed. Some 
major indicators of health, such as life expectancy, are consis­
tently improving, while others, such as rate and number of dia­
betes deaths, are getting worse. Changes in these metrics may 
differ across populations and over time. For example, though 
rates of obesity have increased in both children and adults over 
the last 30 years or more, rates over just the last decade have 
remained steady for adults but increased among children.27 
Incidence: A measure of the frequency with which 
an event, such as a new case of illness, occurs in a 
population over a period of time.
Morbidity: A disease or condition that reduces 
health and the quality of life. The morbidity rate is 
a measure of the frequency of disease among a 
defined population during a specified time period.
Mortality: Death as a health outcome. The mortality 
rate is the number of deaths in a defined population 
during a specified time period.
Premature (early) mortality or death: Deaths that 
occur earlier than a specified age, often the average 
life expectancy at birth.  
Prevalence: A measure of the number or proportion 
of people with a specific disease or condition at a 
specific point in time.
Surveillance: The collection, analysis, interpretation, 
and dissemination of health data. 
Terminology

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
33
Climate change impacts to human health will act on top of 
these underlying trends. Some of these underlying health con­
ditions can increase sensitivity to climate change effects such 
as heat waves and worsening air quality (see Ch. 2: Tempera­
ture-Related Death and Illness; Ch. 3: Air Quality Impacts; Ch. 
9: Populations of Concern). Understanding the trends in these 
conditions is therefore important in considering how many 
people are likely to experience illness when exposed to these 
climate change effects. Potential climate change related health 
impacts may reduce the improvements that would otherwise 
be expected in some indicators of health status and accentuate 
trends towards poorer health in other health indicators.1, 28 
Examples of health indicators that have been improving be­
tween 2000 and 2013 include the following:
•	 Life expectancy at birth increased from 76.8 to 78.8 years.29
•	 Death rates per 100,000 people from heart disease and can­
cer decreased from 257.6 to 169.8 and from 199.6 to 163.2, 
respectively.29
•	 The percent of people over age 18 who say they smoke de­
creased from 23.2% to 17.8%.29
At the same time, some health trends related to the preva­
lence of chronic diseases, self-reported ill health, and disease 
risk factors have been getting worse. For example:
•	 The percentage of adult (18 years and older) Americans de­
scribing their health as “poor or fair” increased from 8.9% in 
2000 to 10.3% in 2012.29
•	 Prevalence of physician-diagnosed diabetes among adults 
aged 20 and over increased from 5.2% in 1988–1994 to 8.4% 
in 2009-2012.29
•	 The prevalence of obesity among adults (aged 20–74) 
increased by almost three-fold from 1960–1962 (13.4% of 
adults classified as obese) to 2009–2010 (36.1% of adults 
classified as obese).30
•	 In the past 30 years, obesity has more than doubled in chil­
dren and quadrupled in adolescents in the United States. The 
percentage of children aged 6–11 who were obese increased 
from 7% in 1980 to nearly 18% in 2012. Similarly, the per­
centage of adolescents aged 12–19 years who were obese 
increased from 5% to nearly 21% over the same period. In 
2012, approximately one-third of American children and ado­
lescents were overweight or obese.31
Table 1 shows some examples of underlying health conditions 
that are associated with increased vulnerability to health 
effects from climate change related exposures (see Ch. 9: Pop­
ulations of Concern for more details) and provides information 
on current status and future trends.
Health status is often associated with demographics and socio­
economic status. Changes in the overall size of the population, 
racial and ethnic composition, and age distribution affect the 
health status of the population. Poverty, educational attain­
ment, access to care, and discrimination all contribute to dis­
parities in the incidence and prevalence of a variety of medical 
conditions (see Ch. 9: Populations of Concern). Some examples 
of these interactions include: 
Older Adults. In 2013, the percentage of adults age 75 
and older described as persons in fair or poor health 
totaled 27.6%, as compared to 6.2% for adults age 18 to 
44.29 Among adults age 65 and older, the number in nurs­
ing homes or other residential care facilities totaled 1.8 
million in 2012, with more than 1 million utilizing home 
health care.32 
Children. Approximately 9.0% of children in the United 
States have asthma. Between 2011 and 2013, rates for 
Black (15.3%) and Hispanic (8.6%) children were higher 
than the rate for White (7.8%) children.29 Rates of asthma 
were also higher in poor children who live below 100% of 
the poverty level (12.4%).29
Diabetes increases sensitivity to heat stress.

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
34
Table 1: Current estimates and future trends in chronic health conditions that interact with the health 
risks associated with climate change.
Health 
Conditions 
Current Estimates
Future Trends 
Possible Influences 
of Climate Change
Alzheimer's 
Disease
Approximately 5 million 
Americans over 65 had 
Alzheimer's disease in 2013.33
Prevalence of Alzheimer’s is 
expected to triple to 13.8 million 
by 2050.33
Persons with cognitive 
impairments are vulnerable to 
extreme weather events that 
require evacuation or other 
emergency responses.
Asthma
Average asthma prevalence in 
the U.S. was higher in children 
(9% in 2014)29 than in adults 
(7% in 2013).34 Since the 1980s, 
asthma prevalence increased, 
but rates of asthma deaths and 
hospital admissions declined.35, 36
Stable incidence and increasing 
prevalence of asthma is 
projected in the U.S. in coming 
decades.
Asthma is exacerbated by 
changes in pollen season and 
allergenicity and in exposures 
to air pollutants affected by 
changes in temperature, 
humidity, and wind.28
Chronic 
Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD)
In 2012, approximately 6.3% of 
adults had COPD. Deaths from 
chronic lung diseases increased 
by 50% from 1980 to 2010.37, 38
Chronic respiratory diseases are 
the third leading cause of death 
and are expected to become 
some of the most costly illnesses 
in coming decades.37
COPD patients are more 
sensitive than the general 
population to changes in 
ambient air quality associated 
with climate change.
Diabetes
In 2012, approximately 9% of 
the total U.S. population had 
diabetes. Approximately 18,400 
people younger than age 20 
were newly diagnosed with type 
1 diabetes in 2008–2009; an 
additional 5,000 were diagnosed 
with type 2.39
New diabetes cases are 
projected to increase from about 
8 cases per 1,000 in 2008 to 
about 15 per 1,000 in 2050. 
If recent increases continue, 
prevalence is projected to 
increase to 33% of Americans by 
2050.40
Diabetes increases sensitivity 
to heat stress; medication and 
dietary needs may increase 
vulnerability during and after 
extreme weather events.
Cardiovascular 
Disease
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
is the leading cause of death in 
the U.S.41
By 2030, approximately 41% of 
the U.S. population is projected 
to have some form of CVD.42
Cardiovascular disease 
increases sensitivity to heat 
stress.
Mental Illness
Depression is one of the most 
common types of mental illness, 
with approximately 7% of adults 
reporting a major episode in the 
past year. Lifetime prevalence 
is approximately twice as high 
for women as for men.43 Lifetime 
prevalence is more than 15% for 
anxiety disorders and nearly 4% 
for bipolar disorder.44
By 2050, the total number of 
U.S. adults with depressive 
disorder is projected to increase 
by 35%, from 33.9 million to 45.8 
million, with those over age 65 
having a 117% increase.43
Mental illness may impair 
responses to extreme events; 
certain medications increase 
sensitivity to heat stress.
Obesity
In 2009–2010, approximately 
35% of American adults were 
obese.31 In 2012, approximately 
32% of youth (aged 2–19) were 
overweight or obese.45, 46
By 2030, 51% of the U.S. 
population is expected to be 
obese. Projections suggest a 
33% increase in obesity and 
a 130% increase in severe 
obesity.47
Obesity increases sensitivity to 
high ambient temperatures.
Disability
Approximately 18.7% of the U.S. 
population has a disability. In 
2010, the percent of American 
adults with a disability was 
approximately 16.6% for those 
age 21–64 and 49.8% for 
persons 65 and older.48
The number of older adults with 
activity limitations is expected to 
grow from 22 million in 2005 to 
38 million in 2030.49
Persons with disabilities may 
find it hard to respond when 
evacuation is required and when 
there is no available means of 
transportation or easy exit from 
residences

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
35
Non-Hispanic Blacks. In 2014, the percentage of non-His­
panic Blacks of all ages who were described as persons in 
fair or poor health totaled 14.3% as compared to 8.7% for 
Whites. Health risk factors for this population include high 
rates of smoking, obesity, and hypertension in adults, as 
well as high infant death rates.29
Hispanics. The percentage of Hispanics of all ages who 
were described as persons in fair or poor health totaled 
12.7% in 2014. Health disparities for Hispanics include 
moderately higher rates of smoking in adults, low birth 
weights, and infant deaths.29
The impacts of climate change may worsen these health 
disparities by exacerbating some of the underlying conditions 
they create. For example, disparities in life expectancy may be 
exacerbated by the effects of climate change related heat and 
air pollution on minority populations that have higher rates of 
hypertension, smoking, and diabetes. Conversely, public health 
measures that reduce disparities and overall rates of illness in 
populations would lessen vulnerability to worsening of health 
status from climate change effects.
1.4	 Quantifying Health Impacts
For some changes in exposures to health risks related to climate 
change, the future rate of a health impact associated with any 
given environmental exposure can be estimated by multiplying 
three values: 1) the baseline rate of the health impact, 2) the 
expected change in exposure, and 3) the exposure–response 
function. An exposure–response function is an estimate of how 
the risk of a health impact changes with changes in exposures, 
and is related to sensitivity, one of the three components of 
vulnerability. For example, an exposure–response function 
for extreme heat might be used to quantify the increase in 
heat-related deaths in a region (the change in health impact) for 
every 1°F increase in daily ambient temperature (the change in 
exposure).
The ability to quantify many types of health impacts is depen­
dent on the availability of data on the baseline incidence or 
prevalence of the health impact, the ability to characterize 
the future changes in the types of exposures relevant to that 
health impact, and how well the relationship between these 
exposures and health impacts is understood. Health impacts 
with many intervening factors, like infectious diseases, may 
require different and more complex modeling approaches. 
Where our understanding of these relationships is strong, 
some health impacts, even those occurring in unprecedent­
ed places or times of the year, may in fact be predictable. 
Where there is a lack of data or these relationships are poorly 
understood, health impacts are harder to project. For more 
information on exposure–response (also called dose–response 
or concentration–response) functions, see the Exposure–Re­
sponse section in Appendix 1: Technical Support Document. 
Information on trends in underlying health or background 
rates of health impacts is summarized in Section 1.3, “Our 
Changing Health.” Data on the incidence and prevalence of 
health conditions are obtained through a complicated sys­
tem of state- and city-level surveillance programs, national 
health surveys, and national collection of 
data on hospitalizations, emergency room 
visits, and deaths. For example, data on 
the incidence of a number of infectious 
diseases are captured through the National 
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.50 
This system relies first on the mandatory reporting of specific 
diseases by health care providers to state, local, territorial, 
and tribal health departments. These reporting jurisdictions 
then have the option of voluntarily providing the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with data on a set 
of nationally notifiable diseases. Because of challenges with 
getting health care providers to confirm and report specific 
diagnoses of reportable diseases in their patients, and the 
lack of requirements for reporting a consistent set of diseases 
and forwarding data to CDC, incidence of infectious disease is 
generally believed to be underreported, and actual rates are 
uncertain.51
Asthma affects approximately 9% of children in the United 
States.

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
36
Characterizing certain types of climate change related ex­
posures can be a challenge. Exposures can consist of tem­
perature changes and other weather conditions, inhaling air 
pollutants and pollens, consuming unsafe food supplies or 
contaminated water, or experiencing trauma or other mental 
health consequences from weather disasters. For some health 
impacts, the ability to understand the relationships between 
climate-related exposures and health impacts is limited by 
these difficulties in characterizing exposures or in obtaining 
accurate data on the occurrence of illnesses. For these health 
impacts, scientists may not have the capability to project 
changes in a health outcome (like incidence of diseases), and 
can only estimate how risks of exposure will change. For exam­
ple, modeling capabilities allow projections of the impact of 
rising water temperatures on the concentration of Vibrio bac­
teria, which provides an understanding of geographic changes 
in exposure but does not capture how people may be exposed 
and how many will actually become sick (see Ch. 6: Water-Re­
lated Illness). Nonetheless, the ability to project changes in 
exposure or in intermediate determinants of health impacts 
may improve understanding of the change in health risks, 
even if modeling quantitative changes in health impacts is not 
possible. For example, seasonal temperature and precipitation 
projections may be combined to assess future changes in am­
bient pollen concentrations (the exposure that creates risk), 
even though the potential associated increase in respiratory 
and allergic diseases (the health impacts) cannot be directly 
modeled (see Ch. 3: Air Quality Impacts). 
Modeling Approaches Used in this Report
Four chapters within this assessment—Ch. 2: Temperature-Re­
lated Death and Illness, Ch. 3: Air Quality Impacts, Ch. 5: 
Figure 6: Examples of sources of uncertainty in projecting impacts of climate change on human health. The left column illustrates 
the exposure pathway through which climate change can affect human health. The right column lists examples of key sources of 
uncertainty surrounding effects of climate change at each stage along the exposure pathway.
Sources of Uncertainty

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
37
Adverse health effects attributed to climate 
change can have many economic and social 
consequences, including direct medical costs, 
work loss, increased care giving, and other 
limitations on everyday activities
Vector-Borne Diseases, and Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness—in­
clude new peer-reviewed, quantitative analyses based on 
modeling. The analyses highlighted in these chapters mainly 
relied on climate model output from the Coupled Model 
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). Due to limited data 
availability and computational resources, the studies high­
lighted in the four chapters analyzed only a subset of the full 
CMIP5 dataset, with most of 
the studies including at least 
one analysis based on RCP6.0, 
an upper midrange greenhouse 
gas concentration pathway, to 
facilitate comparisons across 
chapters. For example, the air 
quality analysis examined results 
from two different RCPs, with a 
different climate model used for 
each, while the waterborne analyses examined results from 
21 of the CMIP5 models for a single RCP. See the Guide to the 
Report and Appendix 1: Technical Support Document for more 
on modeling and scenarios.  
Adverse health effects attributed to climate change can have 
many economic and social consequences, including direct 
medical costs, work loss, increased care giving, and other lim­
itations on everyday activities. Though economic impacts are a 
crucial component to understanding risk from climate change, 
and may have important direct and secondary impacts on 
human health and well-being by reducing resources available 
for other preventative health measures, economic valuation of 
the health impacts was not reported in this assessment.
Uncertainty in Health Impact Assessments
Figure 6 illustrates different sources of uncertainty along the 
exposure pathway.
Two of the key uncertainties in projecting future global 
temperatures are 1) uncertainty about future concentrations 
of greenhouse gases, and 2) uncertainty about how much 
warming will occur for a given increase in greenhouse gas con­
centrations. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
Fifth Assessment Report found that the most likely response of 
the climate system to a doubling of carbon dioxide concentra­
tions lies between a 1.5°C and 4.5°C (2.7°F to 8.1°F) increase 
in global average temperature.1 Future concentrations depend 
on both future emissions and how long these emissions 
remain in the atmosphere (which can vary depending on how 
natural systems process those emissions). To capture these 
uncertainties, climate modelers often use multiple models, 
analyze multiple scenarios, and conduct sensitivity analyses to 
assess the significance of these uncertainties.
Uncertainty in current and future estimates of health or socio­
economic status is related to several factors. In general, esti­
mates are more uncertain for less-prevalent health conditions 
(such as rare cancers versus cardiovascular disease), smaller 
subpopulations (such as Hispanic subpopulations versus White 
adults), smaller geographic areas (census tracts versus state 
or national scale), and time periods further into the future 
(decades versus seasons or years). Most current estimates of 
disease prevalence or socioeconomic status have uncertainty 
expressed as standard errors or confidence intervals that are 
derived from sampling methods 
and sample sizes. When model­
ing health impacts using data on 
health prevalence or socioeco­
nomic status, these measures 
of uncertainty are typically 
included in the analysis to help 
establish a range of plausible 
results. Expert judgment is typ­
ically used to assess the overall 
effects of uncertainty from estimates of health or socioeco­
nomic status when assessing the scientific literature.
The factors related to uncertainty in exposure–response func­
tions are similar to those for the projections of health or so­
cioeconomic status. Estimates are more uncertain for smaller 
subpopulations, less-prevalent health conditions, and smaller 
geographic areas. Because these estimates are based on 
observations of real populations, their validity when applied 
to populations in the future is more uncertain the further into 
the future the application occurs. Uncertainty in the estimates 
of the exposure–outcome relationship also comes from factors 
related to the scientific quality of relevant studies, including 
appropriateness of methods, source of data, and size of study 
populations. Expert judgment is used to evaluate the validity 
of an individual study as well as the collected group of rele­
vant studies in assessing uncertainty in estimates of exposure–
outcome relationships.
Approach to Reporting Uncertainty in Key Findings
Despite the sources of uncertainty described above, the cur­
rent state of the science allows an examination of the likely di­
rection of and trends in the health impacts of climate change. 
Over the past ten years, the models used for climate and 
health assessments have become more useful and more ac­
curate (for example, Melillo et al. 2014).6, 52, 53 This assessment 
builds on that improved capability. A more detailed discussion 
of the approaches to addressing uncertainty from the various 
sources can be found in the Guide to the Report and Appendix 
1: Technical Support Document.
Two kinds of language are used when describing the un­
certainty associated with specific statements in this report: 
confidence language and likelihood language. Confidence in 
the validity of a finding is expressed qualitatively and is based 
on the type, amount, quality, strength, and consistency of 
evidence and the degree of expert agreement on the finding. 
Likelihood, or the projected probability of an impact occurring, 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
38
is based on quantitative estimates or measures of uncertainty 
expressed probabilistically (in other words, based on statis­
tical analysis of observations or model results, or on expert 
judgment). Whether a Key Finding has a confidence level 
associated with it or, where findings can be quantified, both 
a confidence and likelihood level associated with it, involves 
the expert assessment and consensus of the chapter author 
teams. 
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 25–Los Angeles, California skyline: © Lisa Romerein/Corbis
Pg. 26– Doctor showing girl how to use stethoscope: © John 
Fedele/Blend Images/Corbis
Pg. 31–Collapsed house after Hurricane Sandy: © iStockPhoto.
com/Aneese
Pg. 33– Woman checking blood sugar levels: © Monkey Business 
Images/Corbis
Pg. 35–Girl suffering from asthma: © Stephen Welstead/LWA/
Corbis
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
39
1.	
IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assess­
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, 
S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and 
P.M. Midgley (Eds.), 1535 pp. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY. http://www.climat­
echange2013.org
2.	
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 
3.	
Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, 
G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, M. Wehner, J. Willis, D. 
Anderson, S. Doney, R. Feely, P. Hennon, V. Kharin, T. 
Knutson, F. Landerer, T. Lenton, J. Kennedy, and R. Somer­
ville, 2014: Ch. 2: Our changing climate. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 19-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0KW5CXT 
4.	
EPA, 2014: Climate Change Indicators in the United States, 
2014. 3rd edition. EPA 430-R-14-04, 107 pp. U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. http://www.
epa.gov/climatechange/pdfs/climateindicators-full-2014.pdf
5.	
Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, 
G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, M. Wehner, J. Willis, D. 
Anderson, V. Kharin, T. Knutson, F. Landerer, T. Lenton, 
J. Kennedy, and R. Somerville, 2014: Appendix 3: Climate 
science supplement. Climate Change Impacts in the United 
States: The Third National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., 
T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change 
Research Program, Washington, D.C., 735-789.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.7930/J0KS6PHH 
6.	
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 2014: 
Appendix 5: Scenarios and models. Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. 
U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 
821-825.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0B85625 
7.	
Gallopin, G.C., 2006: Linkages between vulnerability, 
resilience, and adaptive capacity. Global Environmental 
Change, 16, 293-303.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenv­
cha.2006.02.004 
8.	
Smit, B. and J. Wandel, 2006: Adaptation, adaptive capacity 
and vulnerability. Global Environmental Change, 16, 282-
292.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.03.008 
9.	
IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, 
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estra­
da, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. Mac­
Cracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (Eds.), 1132 pp. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, 
NY. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/
10.	 NRC, 2012: Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 244 pp.  
11.	 Ebi, K.L. and J.C. Semenza, 2008: Community-based adap­
tation to the health impacts of climate change. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35, 501-507.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.018 
12.	 Hess, J.J., J.Z. McDowell, and G. Luber, 2012: Integrating 
climate change adaptation into public health practice: Using 
adaptive management to increase adaptive capacity and build 
resilience. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120, 171-179. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1103515 
13.	 Bouzid, M., L. Hooper, and P.R. Hunter, 2013: The effec­
tiveness of public health interventions to reduce the health 
impact of climate change: A systematic review of systematic 
reviews. PLoS ONE, 84, e62041.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0062041 
14.	 Shrestha, L.B. and E.J. Heisler, 2011: The Changing Demo­
graphic Profile of the United States. CRS Report No. 
RL32701, 32 pp. Congressional Research Service. http://fas.
org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32701.pdf
15.	 U.S. Census Bureau, 2010: U.S. Census 2010: Resident 
Population Data. U.S. Department of Commerce. http://
www.census.gov/2010census/data/apportionment-pop-text.
php
16.	 U.S. Census Bureau, 2014: 2014 National Population Pro­
jections: Summary Tables. Table 1. Projections of the Pop­
ulation and Components of Change for the United States: 
2015 to 2060 (NP2014-T1). U.S. Department of Com­
merce, Washington, D.C. http://www.census.gov/popula­
tion/projections/data/national/2014/summarytables.html
References

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
40
17.	 Vincent, G.K. and V.A. Velkof, 2010: The Next Four 
Decades: The Older Population in the United States: 2010 
to 2050. Current Population Reports #P25-1138, 16 pp. 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics 
Administration, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C. 
http://www.census.gov/prod/2010pubs/p25-1138.pdf
18.	 U.S. Census Bureau, 2014: 2014 National Population 
Projections: Summary Tables. Table 9. Projections of the 
Population by Sex and Age for the United States: 2015 to 
2060 U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C. 
http://www.census.gov/population/projections/data/nation­
al/2014/summarytables.html
19.	 Passel, J.S. and D. Cohen, 2008: U.S. Population Projec­
tions:  2005-2050. 49 pp. Pew Research Center, Washing­
ton, D.C. http://www.pewhispanic.org/files/reports/85.pdf
20.	 NRC, 2006: Hispanics and the Future of America. Tienda, 
M. and F. Mitchell, Eds. National Research Council. The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 502 pp. 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/11539/hispanics-and-the-fu­
ture-of-america
21.	 Schwabish, J.A., 2013: Modeling Individual Earnings in 
CBO’s Long-term Microsimulation Model. CBO Working 
Paper Series 2013-04, 28 pp. Congressional Budget Office, 
Washington, D.C. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/
cbofiles/attachments/44306_CBOLT.pdf
22.	 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2014: 
2013 Survey of Consumer Finances: SCF Chartbook. http://
www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/files/BulletinCharts.
pdf
23.	 Gabe, T., 2010: Poverty in the United States, 2009. CRS 
7-5700. Congressional Research Service, Washington, D.C. 
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace/764/
24.	 DeNavas-Walt, C. and B.D. Proctor, 2015: Income and Pov­
erty in the United States: 2014. Current Population Reports 
P60-252. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C. https://
http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publi­
cations/2015/demo/p60-252.pdf
25.	 Moser, S.C., M.A. Davidson, P. Kirshen, P. Mulvaney, J.F. 
Murley, J.E. Neumann, L. Petes, and D. Reed, 2014: Ch. 25: 
Coastal zone development and ecosystems. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 579-618.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0MS3QNW 
26.	 Cutter, S.L., W. Solecki, N. Bragado, J. Carmin, M. Fragkias, 
M. Ruth, and T. Wilbanks, 2014: Ch. 11: Urban systems, 
infrastructure, and vulnerability. Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. 
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. 
Global Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 282-
296.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0F769GR 
27.	 Johnson, N.B., L.D. Hayes, K. Brown, E.C. Hoo, and K.A. 
Ethier, 2014: CDC National Health Report: Leading Causes 
of Morbidity and Mortality and Associated Behavioral Risk 
and Protective Factors - United States, 2005-2013. MMWR. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 3-27.  http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/su6304a2.htm
28.	 Luber, G., K. Knowlton, J. Balbus, H. Frumkin, M. Hayden, 
J. Hess, M. McGeehin, N. Sheats, L. Backer, C.B. Beard, K.L. 
Ebi, E. Maibach, R.S. Ostfeld, C. Wiedinmyer, E. Zielins­
ki-Gutiérrez, and L. Ziska, 2014: Ch. 9: Human health. Cli­
mate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National 
Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. 
Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washing­
ton, D.C., 220-256.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0PN93H5 
29.	 NCHS, 2015: Health, United States, 2014: With Special 
Feature on Adults Aged 55-64. 473 pp. National Center for 
Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Preven­
tion, Hyattsville, MD. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/
hus14.pdf
30.	 Fryar, C.D., M.D. Carroll, and C.L. Ogden, 2012: Preva­
lence of Overweight, Obesity, and Extreme Obesity Among 
Adults: United States, Trends 1960-1962 through 2009-
2010. CDC National Center for Health Statistics. http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_adult_09_10/obesi­
ty_adult_09_10.pdf
31.	 Ogden, C.L., M.D. Carroll, B.K. Kit, and K.M. Flegal, 
2014: Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the Unit­
ed States, 2011-2012. JAMA - Journal of the American Med­
ical Association, 311, 806-814.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2014.732 
32.	 Harris-Kojetin, L., M. Sengupta, E. Park-Lee, and R. 
Valverde, 2013: Long-Term Care Services in the United 
States: 2013 Overview. Vital and Health Statistics 3(37), 107 
pp. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nsltcp/long_term_care_ser­
vices_2013.pdf
33.	 Hebert, L.E., J. Weuve, P.A. Scherr, and D.A. Evans, 2013: 
Alzheimer disease in the United States (2010–2050) estimat­
ed using the 2010 census. Neurology, 80, 1778-1783.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828726f5 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
41
34.	 CDC, 2015: Asthma: Data, Statistics, and Surveillance: 
Asthma Surveillance Data. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/asth­
madata.htm
35.	 Akinbami, L.J., J.E. Moorman, C. Bailey, H.S. Zahran, M. 
King, C.A. Johnson, and X. Liu, 2012: Trends in Asthma 
Prevalence, Health Care Use, and Mortality in the United 
States, 2001–2010. NCHS Data Brief No. 94, May 2012, 8 
pp. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db94.pdf
36.	 Moorman, J.E., L.J. Akinbami, C.M. Bailey, H.S. Zahran, 
M.E. King, C.A. Johnson, and X. Liu, 2012: National Sur­
veillance of Asthma: United States, 2001-2010. Vital and 
Health Statistics 3(35). National Center for Health Statis­
tics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_035.
pdf
37.	 CDC, 2015: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/copd/
38.	 Kosacz, N.M., A. Punturieri, T.L. Croxton, M.N. Ndenecho, 
J.P. Kiley, G.G. Weinmann, A.G. Wheaton, E.S. Ford, L.R. 
Presley-Cantrell, J.B. Croft, and W.H. Giles, 2012: Chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease among adults - United States, 
2011. MMWR: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 61, 
938-943.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6146a2.htm
39.	 CDC, 2014: National Diabetes Statistics Report: Estimates 
of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States, 2014. 12 
pp. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Cen­
ters for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. http://
www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-diabe­
tes-report-web.pdf
40.	 Boyle, J.P., T.J. Thompson, E.W. Gregg, L.E. Barker, and 
D.F. Williamson, 2010: Projection of the year 2050 burden 
of diabetes in the US adult population: Dynamic modeling 
of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes prevalence. Popula­
tion Health Metrics, 8, 29.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-
7954-8-29 
41.	 Heidenreich, P.A., J.G. Trogdon, O.A. Khavjou, J. Butler, K. 
Dracup, M.D. Ezekowitz, E.A. Finkelstein, Y. Hong, S.C. 
Johnston, A. Khera, D.M. Lloyd-Jones, S.A. Nelson, G. 
Nichol, D. Orenstein, P.W.F. Wilson, and Y.J. Woo, 2011: 
Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in the United 
States: A policy statement from the American Heart Associa­
tion. Circulation, 123, 933-944.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31820a55f5 
42.	 Roger, V.L., A.S. Go, D.M. Lloyd-Jones, E.J. Benjamin, J.D. 
Berry, W.B. Borden, D.M. Bravata, S. Dai, E.S. Ford, C.S. 
Fox, H.J. Fullerton, C. Gillespie, S.M. Hailpern, J.A. Heit, 
V.J. Howard, B.M. Kissela, S.J. Kittner, D.T. Lackland, 
J.H. Lichtman, L.D. Lisabeth, D.M. Makuc, G.M. Mar­
cus, A. Marelli, D.B. Matchar, C.S. Moy, D. Mozaffarian, 
M.E. Mussolino, G. Nichol, N.P. Paynter, E.Z. Soliman, 
P.D. Sorlie, N. Sotoodehnia, T.N. Turan, S.S. Virani, N.D. 
Wong, D. Woo, and M.B. Turner, 2012: Heart disease and 
stroke statistics—2012 update: A report from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation, 125, e2-e220.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ac046 
43.	 Heo, M., C.F. Murphy, K.R. Fontaine, M.L. Bruce, and G.S. 
Alexopoulos, 2008: Population projection of US adults with 
lifetime experience of depressive disorder by age and sex from 
year 2005 to 2050. International Journal of Geriatric Psychi­
atry, 23, 1266-1270.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/gps.2061 
44.	 CDC, 2013: Mental Health: Burden of Mental Illness. Cen­
ters for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. http://
www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/basics/burden.htm
45.	 Flegal, K.M., M.D. Carroll, B.K. Kit, and C.L. Ogden, 
2012: Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution 
of body mass index among US adults, 1999-2010. JAMA- 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 307, 491-497. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2012.39 
46.	 Ogden, C.L., M.D. Carroll, B.K. Kit, and K.M. Flegal, 
2012: Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index 
among US children and adolescents, 1999-2010. JAMA - 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 307, 483-490. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2012.40 
47.	 Finkelstein, E.A., O.A. Khavjou, H. Thompson, J.G. 
Trogdon, L. Pan, B. Sherry, and W. Dietz, 2012: Obesity 
and severe obesity forecasts through 2030. American Jour­
nal of Preventive Medicine, 42, 563-570.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amepre.2011.10.026 
48.	 Brault, M.W., 2012: Americans With Disabilities: 2010. 
Current Population Reports #P70-131, 23 pp. U.S. Census 
Bureau, Washington, D.C. http://www.census.gov/prod/
2012pubs/p70-131.pdf
49.	 Waidmann, T.A. and K. Liu, 2000: Disability trends among 
elderly persons and implications for the future. The Journals 
of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sci­
ences, 55, S298-S307.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geron­
b/55.5.S298 

1–INTRODUCTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
42
50.	 CDC, 2014: National Notifiable Disease Surveillance Sys­
tem (NNDSS). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA. http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/script/DataCol­
lection.aspx
51.	 CDC, 2015: Lyme Disease Surveillance and Available Data. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 
http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/survfaq.html
52.	 Post, E.S., A. Grambsch, C. Weaver, P. Morefield, J. Huang, 
L.-Y. Leung, C.G. Nolte, P. Adams, X.-Z. Liang, J.-H. Zhu, 
and H. Mahone, 2012: Variation in estimated ozone-related 
health impacts of climate change due to modeling choices 
and assumptions. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120, 
1559-1564.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104271 
53.	 Tamerius, J.D., E.K. Wise, C.K. Uejio, A.L. McCoy, and 
A.C. Comrie, 2007: Climate and human health: Synthesiz­
ing environmental complexity and uncertainty. Stochastic 
Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 21, 601-613. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00477-007-0142-1 
54.	 Sun, L., K.E. Kunkel, L.E. Stevens, A. Buddenberg, J.G. 
Dobson, and D.R. Easterling, 2015: Regional Surface Cli­
mate Conditions in CMIP3 and CMIP5 for the United 
States: Differences, Similarities, and Implications for the 
U.S. National Climate Assessment. NOAA Technical Report 
NESDIS 144, 111 pp. National Oceanic and Atmospher­
ic Administration, National Environmental Satellite, Data, 
and Information Service. http://www.nesdis.noaa.gov/tech­
nical_reports/NOAA_NESDIS_Technical_Report_144.pdf
End

TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH 
AND ILLNESS
2
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
Lead Authors
Marcus C. Sarofim* 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Shubhayu Saha
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Michelle D. Hawkins 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
David M. Mills 
Abt Associates
Contributing Authors
Jeremy Hess 
University of Washington
Radley Horton 
Columbia University
Patrick Kinney 
Columbia University
Joel Schwartz 
Harvard University
Alexis St. Juliana 
Abt Associates
Recommended Citation: Sarofim, M.C., S. Saha, M.D. Hawkins, D.M. Mills, J. Hess, R. Horton, P. Kinney, J. Schwartz, and A. St. Juliana, 
2016: Ch. 2: Temperature-Related Death and Illness. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A 
Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 43–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0MG7MDX 
*Chapter Coordinator
U.S. Global Change Research Program

44
TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH 
AND ILLNESS
FPO
2
Key Findings
Future Increases in Temperature-Related Deaths 
Key Finding 1: Based on present-day sensitivity to heat, an increase of thousands to tens of thousands of 
premature heat-related deaths in the summer [Very Likely, High Confidence] and a decrease of premature cold-
related deaths in the winter [Very Likely, Medium Confidence] are projected each year as a result of climate 
change by the end of the century. Future adaptation will very likely reduce these impacts (see Changing 
Tolerance to Extreme Heat Finding). The reduction in cold-related deaths is projected to be smaller than the 
increase in heat-related deaths in most regions [Likely, Medium Confidence].
Even Small Differences from Seasonal Average Temperatures Result in Illness and Death
Key Finding 2: Days that are hotter than usual in the summer or colder than usual in the winter are both 
associated with increased illness and death [Very High Confidence]. Mortality effects are observed even 
for small differences from seasonal average temperatures [High Confidence]. Because small temperature 
differences occur much more frequently than large temperature differences, not accounting for the effect 
of these small differences would lead to underestimating the future impact of climate change [Likely, High 
Confidence].
Changing Tolerance to Extreme Heat
Key Finding 3: An increase in population tolerance to extreme heat has been observed over time [Very High 
Confidence]. Changes in this tolerance have been associated with increased use of air conditioning, improved 
social responses, and/or physiological acclimatization, among other factors [Medium Confidence]. Expected 
future increases in this tolerance will reduce the projected increase in deaths from heat [Very Likely, Very High 
Confidence].
Some Populations at Greater Risk
Key Finding 4: Older adults and children have a higher risk of dying or becoming ill due to extreme heat [Very 
High Confidence]. People working outdoors, the socially isolated and economically disadvantaged, those with 
chronic illnesses, as well as some communities of color, are also especially vulnerable to death or illness [Very 
High Confidence].

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
45
2.1	 Introduction
The Earth is warming due to elevated concentrations of green­
house gases, and will continue to warm in the future. U.S. aver­
age temperatures have increased by 1.3°F to 1.9°F since record 
keeping began in 1895, heat waves have become more frequent 
and intense, and cold waves have become less frequent across 
the nation (see Ch. 1: Introduction). Annual average U.S. tem­
peratures are projected to increase by 3°F to 10°F by the end 
of this century, depending on future emissions of greenhouse 
gases and other factors.1 These temperature changes will have 
direct effects on human health.
Days that are hotter than the average seasonal temperature in 
the summer or colder than the average seasonal temperature 
in the winter cause increased levels of illness and death by 
compromising the body’s ability to regulate its temperature 
or by inducing direct or indirect health complications. Figure 
1 provides a conceptual model of the various climate drivers, 
social factors, and environmental and institutional factors that 
can interact to result in changes in illness and deaths as a result 
of extreme heat. Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases 
lead to an increase of both average and extreme temperatures, 
leading to an increase in deaths and illness from heat and a 
potential decrease in deaths from cold. Challenges involved in 
determining the temperature–death relationship include a lack 
of consistent diagnoses on death certificates and the fact that 
the health implications of extreme temperatures are not abso­
lute, differing from location to location and changing over time. 
Both of these issues can be partially addressed through the 
use of statistical methods. Climate model projections of future 
temperatures can be combined with the estimated relation­
ships between temperatures and health in order to assess how 
deaths and illnesses resulting from temperature could change 
in the future. The impact of a warming climate on deaths and 
illnesses will not be realized equally as a number of populations, 
such as children, the elderly, and economically disadvantaged 
groups, are especially vulnerable to temperature. 
Climate Change and Health—Extreme Heat
Figure 1: This conceptual diagram illustrates the key pathways by which climate change influences human health during an extreme 
heat event, and potential resulting health outcomes (center boxes). These exposure pathways exist within the context of other factors 
that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that influence vulnerability for individuals are 
shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. Key factors that influence vulnerability at 
larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and management, and institutions, are shown in the left box. All 
of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s vulnerability through changes in exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change. See Chapter 1: Introduction for more information.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
46
2.2	 Contribution of Extreme Temperatures to Death 
and Illness
Temperature extremes most directly affect health by compro­
mising the body’s ability to regulate its internal temperature. 
Loss of internal temperature control can result in a cascade of 
illnesses, including heat cramps, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, 
and hyperthermia in the presence of extreme heat, and 
hypothermia and frostbite in the presence of extreme cold. 
Temperature extremes can also worsen chronic conditions 
such as cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, cerebro­
vascular disease, and diabetes-related conditions. Prolonged 
exposure to high temperatures is associated with increased 
hospital admissions for cardiovascular, kidney, and respiratory 
disorders. Exposures to high minimum temperatures may also 
reduce the ability of the human body to recover from high 
daily maximum temperatures. 
2.3	 Defining Temperature Exposures
Extreme temperatures are typically defined by some measure, 
for example, an ambient temperature, heat index (a combina­
tion of temperature and humidity), or wind chill (a combina­
tion of temperature and wind speed), exceeding predefined 
thresholds over a number of days.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Extremes can be 
defined by average, minimum, or maximum daily tempera­
tures, by nighttime temperatures, or by daytime tempera­
tures. However, there is no standard method for defining a 
heat wave or cold wave. There are dramatic differences in 
the observed relationships between temperature, death, and 
illness across different regions and seasons; these relation­
ships vary based on average temperatures in those locations 
and the timing of the heat or cold event. For example, a 95°F 
day in Vermont will have different implications for health 
than a 95°F day in Texas, and 
similarly, a 95°F day in May will 
have different implications than 
one in August9, 10, 11, 12 (this is 
further discussed in"Evidence 
of Adaptation to Temperature 
Extremes" on page 49). There­
fore, in some cases, temperature extremes are defined by 
comparison to some local average (for example, the top 1% of 
warmest days recorded in a particular location) rather than to 
some absolute temperature (such as 95°F). While temperature 
extremes are generally determined based on weather sta­
tion records, the exposure of individuals will depend on their 
location: urban heat islands, microclimates, and differences 
between indoor and outdoor temperatures can all lead to 
differences between weather station data and actual expo­
sure. The indoor environment is particularly important as most 
people spend the majority of their time inside. 
One exception to using relative measures of temperature is 
that there are some critical physical and weather condition 
thresholds that are absolute. For example, one combined 
measure of humidity and temperature is known as the wet 
bulb temperature. As the wet bulb temperature reaches or 
exceeds the threshold of 35°C (95°F), the human body can no 
longer cool through perspiration, and recent evidence sug­
gests that there is a physical heat tolerance limit in humans 
to sustained temperatures above 35°C that is similar across 
diverse climates.13 The combined effects of temperature and 
humidity have been incorporated in tools such as heat index 
tables, which reflect how combinations of heat and relative 
humidity “feel.” The heat index in these tools is often present­
ed with notes about the potential nature and type of health 
risks different combinations of temperature and humidity may 
pose, along with confounding conditions such as exposure to 
direct sunlight or strong winds. 
Variations in heat wave definitions make it challenging to com­
pare results across studies or determine the most appropriate 
public health warning systems.8, 14 This is important as the 
associations between deaths and illnesses and extreme heat 
conditions vary depending on the methods used for defining 
the extreme conditions.2, 15, 16
2.4	 Measuring the Health Impact of Temperature
Two broad approaches are used to study the relationship be­
tween temperatures and illness and death: direct attribution 
and statistical methods.17, 18 
Direct Attribution Studies
With direct attribution, researchers link health outcomes to 
temperatures based on assigned diagnosis codes in medical 
records such as hospital admissions and death certificates. 
For example, the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD-
10) contains specific codes for 
attributing deaths to exposure 
to excessive natural heat (X30) 
and excessive natural cold 
(X31).19 However, medical 
records will not include information on the weather conditions 
at the time of the event or preceding the event. It is generally 
accepted that direct attribution underestimates the number of 
people who die from temperature extremes. Reasons for this 
include difficulties in diagnosing heat-related and cold-related 
deaths, lack of consistent diagnostic criteria, and difficulty in 
identifying, or lack of reporting, heat or cold as a factor that 
worsened a preexisting medical condition.9, 17 Heat-related 
deaths are often not reported as such if another cause of 
death exists and there is no well-publicized heat wave. An 
additional challenging factor in deaths classified as X31 (cold) 
deaths is that a number of these deaths result from situations 
involving substance use/abuse and/or contact with water, 
both of which can contribute to hypothermia.20, 21  
Temperature extremes most directly affect 
health by compromising the body's ability to 
regulate its internal temperature.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
47
exacerbating the cause of death, only recording the ultimate 
cause, such as a stroke or a heart attack (see, for example, 
Figure 2, where the excess deaths during the 1995 Chicago 
heat wave clearly exceeded the number of deaths recorded as 
heat-related on death certificates). Statistical methods focus 
on determining how temperature contributes to premature 
deaths and illness and therefore are not susceptible to this 
kind of undercount, though they face potential biases due to 
time-varying factors like seasonality. Both methods depend on 
temperatures measured at weather stations, though the ac­
tual temperature exposure of individuals may differ. In short, 
while the focus on temperature is consistent in both methods, 
the methods potentially evaluate very different combinations 
of deaths and weather conditions. 
2.5	 Observed Impact of Temperature on Deaths
A number of extreme temperature events in the United States 
have led to dramatic increases in deaths, including events in 
Kansas City and St. Louis in 1980, Philadelphia in 1993, Chica­
go in 1995, and California in 2006. (See Figure 2 for more on 
the July 1995 heat wave in Chicago).28, 29, 30, 31, 32
Recent U.S. studies in specific communities and for specific ex­
treme temperature events continue to conclude that extreme 
temperatures, particularly extreme heat, result in premature 
deaths.7, 30, 36, 37 This finding is further reinforced by a growing 
suite of regional- and national-scale studies documenting an 
increase in deaths following extreme temperature conditions, 
using both direct attribution17 and statistical approaches.9, 10, 
12, 15, 38 The connection between heat events and deaths is also 
evident internationally. The European heat wave of 2003 is an 
especially notable example, as it is estimated to have been re­
sponsible for between 30,000 and 70,000 premature deaths.39 
However, statistical approaches find that elevated death 
rates are seen even for less extreme temperatures. These 
approaches find an optimal temperature, and show that there 
are more deaths at any temperatures that are higher or lower 
than that optimal temperature.11, 40 Even though the increase 
in deaths per degree are smaller near the optimum than at 
more extreme temperatures, because the percentage of days 
that do not qualify as extreme are large,41 it can be important 
to address the changes in deaths that occur for these smaller 
temperature differences.  
A recent analysis of U.S. deaths from temperature extremes 
based on death records found an average of approximately 
1,300 deaths per year from 2006 to 2010 coded as resulting 
from extreme cold exposures, and 670 deaths per year coded 
as resulting from exposure to extreme heat.17 These results, 
and those from all similar studies that rely solely on coding 
within medical records to determine cause of deaths, will 
underestimate the actual number of deaths due to extreme 
temperatures.17, 42 For example, some statistical approaches 
estimate that more than 1,300 deaths per year in the United 
Statistical Studies
Statistical studies measure the impact of temperature on 
death and illness using methods that relate the number of 
cases (for example, total daily deaths in a city) to observed 
weather conditions and other socio-demographic factors. 
These statistical methods determine whether the temperature 
conditions were associated with increased deaths or illness 
above longer-term average levels. These associations establish 
the relationship between temperature and premature deaths 
and illness. In some cases, particularly with extreme tempera­
ture conditions, the increase in premature deaths and illness 
can be quite dramatic and the health impact may be referred 
to in terms of excess deaths or illnesses. Methods for evaluat­
ing the impact of temperature in these models vary. 
Many studies include all the days in the study period, which 
makes it possible to capture changes in deaths resulting from 
small variations of temperatures from their seasonal averag­
es. Other methods restrict the analysis to days that exceed 
some threshold for extreme heat or cold conditions.22 Some 
studies incorporate methods that determine different health 
relationships for wind, air pressure, and cloud cover as well 
as the more common temperature and humidity measures.15 
Another approach is to identify a heat event and compare 
observed illness and deaths during the event with a carefully 
chosen comparison period.23, 24, 25 Many of these methods also 
incorporate socio-demographic factors (for example, age, race, 
and poverty) that may affect the temperature–death relation­
ship. 
Comparing Results of Direct Attribution and Statistical 
Studies
Comparing death estimates across studies is therefore 
complicated by the use of different criteria for temperature 
extremes, different analytical methods, varying time periods, 
and different affected populations. Further, it is widely accept­
ed that characteristics of extreme temperature events such as 
duration, intensity, and timing in season directly affect actual 
death totals.2, 12 Estimates of the average number of deaths 
attributable to heat and cold considering all temperatures, 
rather than just those associated with extreme events, provide 
an alternative for considering the mortality impact of climate 
change.26, 27 Statistical studies can also offer insights into what 
aspects of a temperature extreme are most important. For 
example, there are indications that the relationship between 
high nighttime temperatures and mortality is more pro­
nounced than the relationship for daytime temperatures.12, 16
These two methods (direct attribution and statistical ap­
proaches) yield very different results for several reasons. 
First, statistical approaches generally suggest that the actual 
number of deaths associated with temperature is far greater 
than those recorded as temperature-related in medical re­
cords. Medical records often do not capture the role of heat in 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
48
Heat-Related Deaths During the 1995 Chicago Heat Wave
Figure 2: This figure shows the relationship between high temperatures and deaths observed during the 1995 
Chicago heat wave. The large spike in deaths in mid-July of 1995 (red line) is much higher than the average 
number of deaths during that time of year (orange line), as well as the death rate before and after the heat wave. 
This increase in the rate of deaths occurred during and after the heat wave, as shown here by temperatures 
exceeding 100°F during the day (green line). Humidity and high nighttime temperatures were also key contributing 
factors to this increase in deaths.33 The number of excess deaths has been estimated to be about 700 based on 
statistical methods, but only 465 deaths in Cook County were classified as “heat-related” on death certificates 
during this same period,29 demonstrating the tendency of direct attribution to undercount total heat-related deaths. 
(Figure source: EPA 2014)34
Heat-Related Deaths in Chicago in the Summer of 1995
Figure 2 illustrates an example of excess deaths 
following an extreme heat event. In this case, excess 
deaths are determined by calculating the difference 
between daily observed deaths in Chicago during the 
worst of the heat wave (starting on July 11) and longer-
term daily averages for this time of year. The period of 
extreme heat extended from June 21 through August 
10, 1995. Research into the event suggests it was the 
combination of high humidity, high daily maximum 
temperatures, and high daily minimum temperatures 
that made this event truly exceptional.33 This event 
is estimated to have resulted in nearly 700 excess 
deaths in Chicago, based on a statistical approach.35 
By comparison, a direct attribution approach based 
on death certificates found only 465 deaths were 
attributed to extreme heat during this time period.29 
This kind of underestimate resulting from relying 
on death certificates is common. It is reasonable 
to expect that deaths may be even less likely to be 
attributed to extreme heat during a heat wave that, 
unlike the Chicago event, does not receive a great deal 
of public attention.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
49
States are due to extreme heat.15, 43 Different approaches to 
attributing cause of death lead to differences in the relative 
number of deaths attributed to heat and cold.44 Studies based 
on statistical approaches have found that, despite a larger 
number of deaths being coded as related to extreme cold 
rather than extreme heat, and a larger mortality rate in winter 
overall, the relationship between mortality and an additional 
day of extreme heat is generally much larger than the rela­
tionship between mortality and an additional day of extreme 
cold.12
Confounding Factors and Effect Modifiers
While the direct attribution approach underestimates the 
number of deaths resulting from extreme temperature events, 
there are a few ways in which the statistical approach may 
lead to an overestimation. However, any overestimation due 
to these potential confounding factors and effect modifiers is 
thought to be much smaller than the direct attribution under­
estimation.12
The first potential overestimation results from the connection 
between elevated temperatures and other variables that cor­
relate with temperature, such as poor air quality. This connec­
tion involves a combination of factors, including stagnant air 
masses and changes in the atmospheric chemistry that affect 
the concentrations of air pollutants such as ozone or particu­
late matter (see Ch. 3: Air Qual­
ity Impacts). If some portion of 
the deaths during extreme heat 
events are actually a result of 
the higher levels of atmospheric 
pollution that are correlated 
with these events, then includ­
ing those deaths in a statistical 
analysis to determine the relationship of increased heat on 
human health would result in double counting deaths.10, 45, 46, 47 
However, this issue is often addressed by including air pollu­
tion and other correlated variables in statistical modeling.26
A second consideration when using statistical approaches to 
determine the relationship between temperature and deaths 
is whether some of the individuals who died during the tem­
perature event were already near death, and therefore the 
temperature event could be considered to have “displaced” 
the death by a matter of days rather than having killed a per­
son not otherwise expected to die. This effect is referred to as 
mortality displacement. There is still no consensus regarding 
the influence of mortality displacement on premature death 
estimates, but this effect generally accounts for a smaller por­
tion of premature deaths as events become more extreme.7, 12, 
48, 49, 50
Evidence of Adaptation to Temperature Extremes 
The impact on human health of a given temperature event 
(for example, a 95°F day) can depend on where and when it 
occurs. The evidence also shows larger changes in deaths and 
hospitalizations in response to elevated temperatures in cities 
where temperatures are typically cooler as compared with 
warmer cities.9, 11, 40, 51, 52 This suggests that people can adapt, 
at least partially, to the average temperature that they are 
used to experiencing. Some of this effect can be explained by 
differences in infrastructure. For example, locations with high­
er average temperature, such 
as the Southeast, will generally 
have greater prevalence and use 
of air conditioning. However, 
there is also evidence that there 
is a physiological acclimatization 
(the ability to gradually adapt 
to heat), with changes in sweat 
volume and timing, blood flow and heat transfer to the skin, 
and kidney function and water conservation occurring over 
the course of weeks to months of exposure to a hot climate.53 
For example, as a result of this type of adaptation, heat events 
later in the summer have less of an impact on deaths than 
those earlier in the summer, all else being equal,15 although 
some of  this effect is also due to the deaths of some of the 
most vulnerable earlier in the season. However, children and 
older adults remain vulnerable given their reduced ability to 
regulate their internal temperature and limited acclimatization 
capacities.53
An increased tolerance to extreme temperatures has also 
been observed over multiyear and multidecadal periods.9, 10, 
54, 55, 56 This improvement is likely due to some combination of 
physiological acclimatization, increased prevalence and use of 
air conditioning,10 and general improvements in public health 
over time,9, 54 but the relative importance of each is not yet 
clear.56 
The impact on human health of a given 
temperature event (for example, a 95°day) can 
depend on where and when it occurs.
The relationship between mortality and an additional day of 
extreme heat is generally much larger than the relationship 
between mortality and an additional day of extreme cold.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
50
Recent changes in urban planning and development programs 
reflect an adaptive trend implemented partially in response 
to the anticipated temperature health risks of climate change. 
For example, because urban areas tend to be warmer than 
surrounding rural areas (the “urban heat island” effect), there 
is an increased emphasis on incorporating green space and 
other technologies, such as cool roofs, in new development 
or redevelopment projects.57 Similarly, programs that provide 
advice and services in preparation for or response to extreme 
temperatures continue to increase in number and expand the 
scope of their activity (see for example guidance documents 
on responses to extreme temperature developed by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Environ­
mental Protection Agency).58, 59 Continued changes in personal 
behavior as a result of these efforts, for example, seeking 
access to air-conditioned areas during extreme heat events 
or limiting outside activity, may continue to change future 
exposure to extreme temperatures and other climate-sensitive 
health stressors, such as outdoor air pollutants and vectors for 
disease such as ticks or mosquitoes.
Observed Trends in Heat Deaths
As discussed in Chapter 1, U.S. average temperature has 
increased by 1.3°F to 1.9°F since 1895, with much of that in­
crease occurring since 1970, though this temperature increase 
has not been uniform geographically and some regions, such 
as the Southeast, have seen little increase in temperature and 
extreme heat over time.1, 15 This warming is attributable to 
elevated concentrations of greenhouse gases and it has been 
estimated that three-quarters of moderately hot extremes 
are already a result of this historical warming.60 As discussed 
in the previous section, there have also been changes in the 
tolerance of populations within the United States to extreme 
temperatures. Changes in mortality due to high temperatures 
are therefore a result of the combination of higher tempera­
tures and higher heat tolerance. Use of the direct attribution 
approach, based on diagnosis codes in medical records, to ex­
amine national trends in heat mortality over time is challeng­
ing because of changes in classification methods over time.34 
The few studies using statistical methods that have presented 
total mortality estimates over time suggest that, over the 
last several decades, reductions in mortality due to increases 
in tolerance have outweighed increases in mortality due to 
increased temperatures.15, 61 
2.6	 Observed Impact of Temperature on Illness
Temperature extremes are linked to a range of illnesses re­
ported at emergency rooms and hospitals. However, estimates 
for the national burden of illness associated with extreme 
temperatures are limited. 
Using a direct attribution approach, an analysis of a nationally 
representative database from the Healthcare Utilization Proj­
ect (HCUP) produced an annual average estimate of 65,299 
emergency visits for acute heat illness during the summer 
months (May through September)—an average rate of 21.5 
visits for every 100,000 people each year.62 This result was 
based only on recorded diagnosis codes for hyperthermia and 
probably underestimates the true number of heat-related 
healthcare visits, as a wider range of health outcomes is po­
tentially affected by extreme heat. For example, hyperthermia 
is not the only complication from extreme heat, and not every 
individual that suffers from a heat illness visits an emergency 
department. In a national study of Medicare patients from 
2004 to 2005, an annual average of 5,004 hyperthermia cases 
and 4,381 hypothermia cases were reported for inpatient and 
outpatient visits.63 None of these studies link health episodes 
to observed temperature data, thus limiting the opportunity 
to attribute these adverse outcomes to specific heat events or 
conditions.
High ambient heat has been associated with adverse impacts 
for a wide range of illnesses.25 Examples of illnesses associat­
ed with extreme heat include cardiovascular, respiratory, and 
renal illnesses; diabetes; hyperthermia; mental health issues; 
and preterm births. Children spend more time outdoors and 
have insufficient ability for physiologic adaptation, and thus 
may be particularly vulnerable during heat waves.64 Respirato­
ry illness among the elderly population was most commonly 
reported during extreme heat.65
Statistical studies examine the association between extreme 
heat and illness using data from various healthcare access 
points (such as hospital admissions, emergency department 
visits, and ambulance dispatches). The majority of these 
studies examine the association of extreme heat with cardio­
vascular and respiratory illnesses. For these particular health 
outcomes, the evidence is mixed, as many studies observed 
elevated risks of illness during periods of extreme heat but 
others found no evidence of elevated levels of illness.24, 51, 66, 67, 
68, 69, 70 The evidence on some of the other health outcomes is 
more robust. Across emergency department visits and hospital 
admissions, high temperature have been associated with  
renal diseases, electrolyte imbalance, and hyperthermia.24, 67, 
Certain occupational groups such as agricultural workers, 
construction workers, and electricity and pipeline utility 
workers are at increased risk for heat- and cold-related illness, 
especially where jobs involve heavy exertion.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
51
71, 72 These health risks vary not only across types of illness but 
also for the same illness across different healthcare settings. In 
general, evidence for associations with morbidity outcomes, 
other than cardiovascular impacts, is strong. 
While there is still uncertainty about how levels of heat-relat­
ed illnesses are expected to change with projected increases 
in summer temperature from climate change,41 advances have 
been made in surveillance of heat-related illness. For exam­
ple, monitoring of emergency ambulance calls during heat 
waves can be used to establish real-time surveillance systems 
to identify extreme heat events.73 The increase in emergency 
visits for a wide range of illnesses during the 2006 heat wave 
in California points to the potential for using this type of infor­
mation in real-time health surveillance systems.24
2.7	 Projected Deaths and Illness from Temperature 
Exposure
Climate change will increase the frequency and severity of 
future extreme heat events while also resulting in generally 
warmer summers and milder winters,1 with implications for 
human health. Absent further adaptation, these changes 
are expected to lead to an increase in illness and death from 
increases in heat, and reductions in illness and death resulting 
from decreases in cold, due to changes in outcomes such as 
heat stroke, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, cere­
brovascular disease, and kidney disorders.41, 74 
A warmer future is projected to lead to increases in future 
mortality on the order of thousands to tens of thousands of 
additional premature deaths per year across the United States 
by the end of this century.22, 38, 54, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79 Studies differ in 
which regions of the United States are examined and in how 
they account for factors such as adaptation, mortality dis­
placement, demographic changes, definitions of heat waves 
and extreme cold, and air quality factors, and some studies 
examine only extreme events while others take into account 
the health effects of smaller deviations from average seasonal 
temperatures. Despite these differences there is reasonable 
agreement on the magnitude of the projected changes. 
Additionally, studies have projected an increase in premature 
deaths due to increases in temperature for Chicago, IL,39, 80 
Dallas, TX,18 the Northeast corridor cities of Boston, MA, New 
York, NY, and Philadelphia, PA,18, 26, 81, 82 Washington State,83, 
84 California,85 or a group of cities including Portland, OR; 
Minneapolis and St. Paul, MN; Chicago, IL; Detroit, MI; Toledo, 
Cleveland, Columbus, and Cincinnati, OH; Pittsburgh and Phil­
adelphia, PA; and Washington, DC.86 However, these regional 
projections use a variety of modeling strategies and therefore 
show more variability in mortality estimates than studies that 
are national in scope. 
Less is known about how non-fatal illnesses will change in 
response to projected increases in heat. However, hospital ad­
missions related to respiratory, hormonal, urinary, genital, and 
renal problems are generally projected to increase.72, 87 Kidney 
stone prevalence has been linked to high temperatures, pos­
sibly due to dehydration leading to concentration of the salts 
that form kidney stones. In the United States, an increased 
rate of kidney stones is observed in southern regions of the 
country, especially the Southeast. An expansion of the regions 
where the risk of kidney stones is higher is therefore plausible 
in a warmer future.88, 89, 90  
The decrease in deaths and illness due to reductions in winter 
cold have not been as well studied as the health impacts of 
increased heat, but the reduction in premature deaths from 
cold are expected to be smaller than the increase in deaths 
from heat in the United States.22, 26, 38, 41, 75, 77 While this is true 
nationally (with the exception of Barreca 2012),75 it may not 
hold for all regions within the country.27 Similarly, international 
studies have generally projected a net increase in deaths from 
a warming climate, though in some regions, decreases in cold 
mortality may outweigh increases in heat mortality.91 The 
projected net increase in deaths is based in part on historical 
studies that show that an additional extreme hot day leads to 
more deaths than an additional extreme cold day, and in part 
on the fact that the decrease in extreme cold deaths is limited 
as the total number of cold deaths approaches zero in a given 
location. 
It is important to distinguish between generally higher winter­
time mortality rates that are not strongly associated with daily 
temperatures—such as respiratory infections and some car­
diovascular disease 12, 92—from mortality that is more directly 
related to the magnitude of the cold temperatures. Some 
recent studies have suggested that factors leading to higher 
wintertime mortality rates may not be sensitive to climate 
warming, and that deaths due to these factors are expected to 
occur with or without climate change. Considering this, some 
estimates of wintertime mortality may overstate the benefit of 
climate change in reducing wintertime deaths.49, 93, 94 
The U.S. population has become less sensitive to heat over 
time. Factors that have contributed to this change include 
infrastructure improvements, including increased access and 
use of air conditioning in homes and businesses, and improved 
societal responses, including increased access to public health 
programs and healthcare.15, 54, 61, 95, 96, 97 Projecting these trends 
into the future is challenging, but this trend of increasing toler­
ance is projected to continue, with future changes in adaptive 
capacity expected to reduce the future increase in mortality.56 
However, there are limits to adaptation, whether physiological53 
or sociotechnical (for example, air conditioning, awareness 
programs, or cooling centers). While historically adaptation has 
outpaced warming, most studies project a future increase in 
mortality even when including assumptions regarding adap­
tation.18, 22, 81, 85, 91 Additionally, the occurrence of events such 
as power outages simultaneous with a heat wave may reduce 
some of these adaptive benefits. Such simultaneous events can 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
52
Research Highlight: Modeling the Effect of Warming on U.S. Deaths
Importance: A warming climate is expected to result in more days that are warmer than today’s usual temperature 
in the summer, leading to an increase in heat-related deaths. A warming climate is also expected to result in fewer 
days that are colder than today’s usual temperatures in the winter, leading to a decrease in cold-related deaths. 
Understanding these changes is an important factor in understanding the human health response to climate 
change. 
Objective: A quantitative projection of future deaths from heat and cold for 209 U.S. cities with a total population 
of over 160 million inhabitants.
Method: A relationship between average daily temperature and deaths by city and month was developed using 
historical data on deaths and temperatures from 1996–2006, generating results for both same-day temperature 
and the average of the previous five-day temperatures to account for delayed responses to temperature. Cities, 
which are defined using county borders, were allocated to nine different clusters based on similarity of climates. 
Temperature–death relationships were refined for cities within a given cluster based on the other cities in that 
cluster. Projections of temperature in future time periods were based on the RCP6.0 scenario from two climate 
models: the Geophysical Fluid Dynamic Laboratory–Coupled Physical Model 3 (GFDL–CM3) and the Model for 
Interdisciplinary Research on Climate (MIROC5). These projections were adjusted to match the historical data 
from the same weather stations that were used in the statistical analysis. Further details can be found in Schwartz 
et al. 2015.27
Figure 3: This figure shows the projected decrease in death rates due to warming in colder months (October–March, top left), 
the projected increase in death rates due to warming in the warmer months (April–September, top right), and the projected net 
change in death rates (combined map, bottom), comparing results for 2100 to those for a 1990 baseline period in 209 U.S. cities. 
These results are from one of the two climate models (GFDL–CM3 scenario RCP6.0) studied in Schwartz et al. (2015). In the 
study, mortality data for a city is based on county-level records, so the borders presented reflect counties corresponding to the 
study cities. Geographic variation in the death rates are due to a combination of differences in the amount of projected warming 
and variation in the relationship between deaths and temperatures derived from the historical health and temperature data. 
These results are based on holding the 2010 population constant in the analyses, with no explicit assumptions or adjustment for 
potential future adaptation. Therefore, these results reflect only the effect of the anticipated change in climate over time. (Figure 
source: Schwartzet al. 2015)27
Projected Changes in Temperature-Related Death Rates

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
53
Research Highlight: Modeling the Effect of Warming on U.S. Deaths, continued
Results: The modeling done for this study projects that future warming, without any adjustments for future 
adaptation, will lead to an increase in deaths during hotter months, defined as April–September, and a decrease in 
deaths during colder months, defined as October–March. Overall, this leads to a total net increase of about 2,000 
to 10,000 deaths per year in the 209 cities by the end of the century compared to a 1990 baseline (Figure 4). Net 
effects vary from city to city, and a small number of cities are projected to experience a decrease in deaths (Figures 3 
and 4). 
Conclusions: This study is an improvement on previous studies because it examines a greater proportion of the 
U.S. population, uses more recent data on deaths, takes advantage of similar relationships between deaths and 
temperature between nearby cities to generate more statistically robust results, and addresses the difference in 
these relationships by month of the year. The results are consistent with most of the previous studies in projecting 
that climate change will lead to an increase in heat deaths on the order of thousands to tens of thousands of annual 
deaths by the end of the century compared to the 1990 baseline, and that the increase in deaths from heat will 
be larger than the reduction in deaths from cold. In contrast to some previous similar studies,22 some individual 
cities show a net reduction in future deaths due to future warming, mainly in locations where the population is 
already well-adapted to heat but poorly prepared for cold (like Florida). Barreca 201275 also shows net mortality 
benefits in some counties, though with a different spatial pattern due to humidity effects. Some other studies also 
have different spatial patterns, projecting high excess mortality in Southern states despite a lower risk per degree 
change, due to larger increases in frequency and duration of heat waves in that region.79 Like most previous studies, 
this analysis does not account for the effects of further adaptation on future mortality. Results are based on the 
temperature–death relationships observed for the period from 1996 to 2006, which reflect historical adaptation to 
extreme temperatures. However, future adaptation would, all else equal, mean that these results may overestimate 
the potential impact of climate change on changes in both heat- and cold-related deaths.
This study increases the confidence in the key finding that the number of heat deaths will increase in the future 
compared to a future with no climate change, and that the increase in heat deaths will be larger than the reduction 
in cold deaths.
Figure 4: This figure shows the projected increase 
in deaths due to warming in the summer months (hot 
season, April–September), the projected decrease 
in deaths due to warming in the winter months (cold 
season, October–March), and the projected net 
change in deaths for the 209 U.S. cities examined. 
These results compare projected deaths for future 
reporting years to results for the year 1990 while 
holding the population constant at 2010 levels and 
without any quantitative adjustment for potential future 
adaptation, so that temperature–death relationships 
observed in the last decade of the available data 
(1997–2006) are assumed to remain unchanged in 
projections over the 21st century. 
With these assumptions, the figure shows an 
increasing health benefit in terms of reduced deaths 
during the cold season (October–March) over the 
21st century from warming temperatures, while 
deaths during the hot season (April–September) 
increase. Overall, the additional deaths from the warming in the hot season exceed the reduction in deaths during the cold season, 
resulting in a net increase in deaths attributable to temperature over time as a result of climate change. The baseline and future 
reporting years are based on 30-year periods where possible, with the exception of 2100: 1990 (1976–2005), 2030 (2016–2045), 
2050 (2036–2065), and 2100 (2086–2100). (Figure source: adapted from Schwartz et al. 2015)27
Projected Changes in Deaths in U.S. Cities by Season

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
54
be more common because of the additional demand on the 
electricity grid due to high air-conditioning usage.98 Another 
potential effect is that if current trends of population growth 
and migration into large urban areas continue, there may be an 
increasing urban heat island effect which will magnify the rate 
of warming locally, possibly leading to more heat-related deaths 
and fewer cold-related deaths.
Projected changes in future health outcomes associated with 
extreme temperatures can be difficult to quantify. Projections 
can depend on 1) the characterization of population sensitiv­
ity to temperature event characteristics such as magnitude, 
duration, and humidity; 2) differences in population sensitivity 
depending on the timing and location of an extreme event; 3) 
future changes in baseline rates of death and illness as well 
as human tolerance and adaptive capacity; 4) the changing 
proportions of vulnerable populations, including the elderly, in 
the future; and 5) uncertainty in climate projections.
2.8	 Populations of Concern for Death and Illness 
from Extreme Temperatures
Impacts of temperature extremes are geographically varied 
and disproportionally affect certain populations of concern 
(see also Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).41  Certain populations 
are more at risk for experiencing detrimental consequences of 
exposure to extreme temperatures due to their sensitivity to 
hot and cold temperatures and limitations to their capacity for 
adapting to new climate conditions.  
Older adults are a rapidly growing population in the United 
States, and heat impacts are projected to occur in places 
where older adults are heavily concentrated and therefore 
most exposed.99 Older adults are at higher risk for tempera­
ture-related mortality and morbidity, particularly those who 
have preexisting diseases, those who take certain medications 
that affect thermoregulation or block nerve impulses (for ex­
ample, beta-blockers, major tranquilizers, and diuretics), those 
who are living alone, or those with limited mobility (see also 
Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).17, 24, 42, 45, 100 The relationship 
between increased temperatures and death in older adults is 
well-understood with strong evidence of heat-related vulner­
ability for adults over 65 and 75 years old.101 An increased risk 
for respiratory and cardiovascular death is observed in older 
adults during temperature extremes due to reduced thermo­
regulation.17, 42, 45, 65 Morbidity studies have also identified links 
between increased temperatures and respiratory and cardio­
vascular hospitalizations in older adults.65 
Children are particularly vulnerable because they must rely 
on others to help keep them safe. This is especially true in 
environments that may lack air conditioning, including homes, 
schools, or cars (see also Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).102 The 
primary health complications observed in children exposed 
to extreme heat include dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, 
fever, renal disease, heat stress, and hyperthermia.64 Infec­
tious and respiratory diseases in children are affected by both 
hot and cold temperatures.64 Inefficient thermoregulation, 
reduced cardiovascular output, and heightened metabolic 
rate are physiological factors driving vulnerability in children 
to extreme heat. Children also spend a considerable amount 
of time outdoors and participating in vigorous physical 
activities.17, 42, 64, 103 High-school football players are especial­
ly vulnerable to heat illness (see also Ch. 9: Populations of 
Concern).104 A limited number of studies show evidence of 
cold-related mortality in children. However, no study has 
examined the relationship between cold temperature and 
cause-specific mortality.64 Pregnant women are also vulnera­
ble to temperature extremes as preterm birth has been asso­
ciated with extreme heat.42, 105, 106 Elevated heat exposure can 
increase dehydration, leading to the release of labor-inducing 
hormones.107 Extreme heat events are also associated with 
adverse birth outcomes, such as low birth weight and infant 
mortality (see Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).
Where a person lives, works, or goes to school can also make 
them more vulnerable to health impacts from extreme tem­
peratures. Of particular concern for densely populated cities is 
the urban heat island effect, where manmade surfaces absorb 
sunlight during the day and then radiate the stored energy 
at night as heat. This process will exacerbate any warming 
from climate change and limit the potential relief of cooler 
nighttime temperatures in urban areas.81 In addition to the 
urban heat island effect, land cover characteristics and poor 
air quality combine to increase the impacts of high ambient 
temperatures for city dwellers and further increase the burden 
on populations of concern within the urban area.12, 17, 45, 108 The 
homeless are often more exposed to heat and cold extremes, 
while also sharing many risk factors with other populations of 
concern such as social isolation, psychiatric illness, and other 
health issues.109 
Race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status can affect vulnera­
bility to temperature extremes. Non-Hispanic Black persons 
F P O
Physiological factors and participation in vigorous outdoor 
activities make children particularly vulnerable to extreme heat.

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
55
have been identified as being more vulnerable than other 
racial and ethnic groups to detrimental consequences of 
exposure to temperature extremes.17, 42, 45, 103, 110, 111 One study 
found that non-Hispanic Blacks were 2.5 times more likely to 
experience heat-related mortality compared to non-Hispanic 
Whites, and non-Hispanic Blacks had a two-fold risk of dying 
from a heat-related event compared to Hispanics.17 Evidence 
of racial differences in heat tolerance due to genetic differenc­
es is inconclusive.110 However, other factors may contribute to 
increased vulnerability of Black populations, including comor­
bidities (co-existing chronic conditions) that increase suscep­
tibility to higher temperatures, disparities in the availability 
and use of air conditioning and in heat risk-related land cover 
characteristics (for example, living in urban areas prone to 
heat-island effects), and environmental justice issues.17, 42, 108, 
110, 112 Overall, the link between temperature extremes, race, 
ethnicity, and socioeconomic status is multidimensional and 
dependent on the outcome being studied. Education level, 
income, safe housing, occupational risks, access to health care, 
and baseline health and nutrition status can further distort 
the association between temperature extremes, race, and 
ethnicity.45, 110
Outdoor workers spend a great deal of time exposed to tem­
perature extremes, often while performing vigorous activities. 
Certain occupational groups such as agricultural workers, con­
struction workers, and electricity and pipeline utility workers 
are at increased risk for heat- and cold-related illness, espe­
cially where jobs involve heavy exertion.100, 113, 114 One study 
found failure of employers to provide for acclimatization to be 
the factor most clearly associated with heat-related death in 
workers.113
Mental, behavioral, and cognitive disorders can be triggered 
or exacerbated by heat waves. Specific illnesses impacted by 
heat include dementia, mood disorders, neurosis and stress, 
and substance abuse.100, 115, 116, 117 Some medications interfere 
with thermoregulation, thereby increasing vulnerability to 
heat.116 One study in Australia found that hospital admissions 
for mental and behavioral disorders increased by 7.3% during 
heat waves above 80°F.115 Studies have also linked extreme 
heat and increased aggressive behavior. (See also Ch. 8: Men­
tal Health).
2.9	 Emerging and Cross-Cutting Issues
Emerging and cross-cutting issues include 1) disparate ways 
that extreme temperature and health are related, 2) urban 
and rural differences, 3) interactions between impacts and 
future changes in adaptation, and 4) projections of extreme 
temperature events. 
The health effects addressed in this chapter are not the only 
ways in which heat and health are related. For example, 
research indicates that hotter temperatures may lead to an in­
crease in violent crime118 and could negatively affect the labor 
force, especially occupational health for outdoor sectors.119, 120 
Extreme temperatures also interact with air quality, which can 
complicate estimating how extreme temperature events im­
pact human health in the absence of air quality changes (see 
"Confounding Factors and Effect Modifiers" on page 49). 
In addition, increased heat may also increase vulnerability to 
poor air quality and allergens, leading to potential non-linear 
health outcome responses. Extreme temperature events, as 
well as other impacts from climate change, can also be asso­
ciated with changes in electricity supply and distribution that 
can have important implications for the availability of heating 
and air conditioning, which are key adaptive measures. 
Though the estimates of the health impact from extreme heat 
discussed in the “Research Highlight” were produced only for 
urban areas (which provided a large sample size for statistical 
validity), there is also emerging evidence regarding high rates 
of heat-related illness in rural areas.6, 62 Occupational exposure 
and a lack of access to air conditioning are some of the factors 
that may make rural populations particularly susceptible to 
extreme heat. There are quantitative challenges to using 
statistical methods to estimate mortality impacts of tem­
peratures in rural areas due to lower population density and 
more dispersed weather stations, but rural residents have also 
demonstrated vulnerability to heat events.121 
Other changes in human behavior will also have implications 
for the linkage between climate and heat-related illness. 
Changes in building infrastructure as a response to changes in 
temperature can have impacts on indoor air quality. Similar­
ly, changes in behavior as a result of temperature changes, 
for example, seeking access to air conditioning, can change 
exposure to indoor and outdoor pollution and vectorborne 
diseases (see Ch. 3: Air Quality Impacts; Ch. 5: Vectorborne 
Diseases).  
Finally, projecting climate variability and the most extreme 
temperature events can be more challenging than project­
ing average warming. Extreme temperatures may rise faster 
than average temperatures,122 with the coldest days warming 
faster than average for much of the twentieth century, and the 
warmest days warming faster than average temperatures in 
the past 30 years.123 Extremely high temperatures in the future 
may also reach levels outside of past experience, in which case 
statistically based relationships may no longer hold for those 
events. There have been suggestive links between rapid recent 
Arctic sea ice loss124 and an increased frequency of cold125 and 
warm extremes,126 but this is an active area of research with 
conflicting results.127, 128 In regions where temperature variability 
increases, mortality will be expected to increase; mortality is 
expected to decrease in regions where variability decreases.129

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
56
2.10	
Research Needs
In addition to the emerging issues identified above, the 
authors highlight the following potential areas for additional 
scientific and research activity on temperature-related illness 
and death based on their review of the literature. Improved 
modeling and more robust projections of climate variability 
and extreme temperatures will enhance the modeling of 
health impacts associated with extremes of heat and cold. 
While the surveillance for temperature-related deaths is rela­
tively robust, understanding the impacts of future changes in 
heat waves and extreme temperatures can be improved with 
better surveillance and documentation of non-fatal illnesses, 
including hospitalizations and emergency room visits, for tem­
perature-associated reasons. With growing implementation of 
heat early warning systems around the country, there is also a 
need for the development of evaluation methods and asso­
ciated collection of data to be able to assess effectiveness of 
such systems and other means of health adaptation.
Future assessments can benefit from research activities that:
•	 further explore the associations between exposure to a 
range of high and low temperatures and exacerbation of 
illnesses across locations and healthcare settings;
•	 improve understanding of how genetic factors and social 
determinants contribute to vulnerability to illness and death 
from extreme temperature exposures;
•	 analyze the combined health effects of temperature and 
other discrete climate-sensitive stressors, such as changing 
air quality, smoke from wildfires, or impacts of extreme 
weather events; 
•	 attribute changes in observed mortality to a changing 
climate; 
•	 develop effective adaptive responses to reduce the potential 
adverse health outcomes attributable to changing tempera­
tures; and
•	 explore how future adaptive measures and behaviors can be 
included in quantitative models of health impacts associat­
ed with extreme temperatures

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
57
Supporting Evidence
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. The authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the overall 
report process, see Appendices 2 and 3.
The content of this chapter was determined after reviewing 
the collected literature. The authors determined that there was 
substantial literature available to characterize both observed 
and projected mortality from elevated temperatures, with 
sufficient literature available to also characterize mortality 
from cold as well as cold-related hospitalizations and illness. 
Populations of concern were also considered to be a high 
priority for this chapter. As discussed in the chapter, there 
were limitations in terms of the state of the literature on 
understanding how future adaptation will influence climate-
related changes in temperature-related mortality, addressing 
the impact of temperature on rural populations, and examining 
health-related endpoints other than mortality and morbidity.
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Future Increases in Temperature-Related Deaths 
Key Finding 1: Based on present-day sensitivity to heat, an 
increase of thousands to tens of thousands of premature 
heat-related deaths in the summer [Very Likely, High 
Confidence] and a decrease of premature cold-related deaths 
in the winter [Very Likely, Medium Confidence] are projected 
each year as a result of climate change by the end of the 
century. Future adaptation will very likely reduce these 
impacts (see Changing Tolerance to Extreme Heat Finding). 
The reduction in cold-related deaths is projected to be smaller 
than the increase in heat-related deaths in most regions 
[Likely, Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
An extensive literature examines projections of mortality due 
to increasing temperatures. In particular, nine studies were 
identified that provide heat mortality projections in the United 
States for at least 10% of the U.S. population.22, 27, 38, 54, 75, 76, 
77, 78, 79 Each of these studies projected an increase in heat-
related mortality due to projections of future warming, though 
several noted the potential modification effect of adaptation 
(discussed in Key Finding #3). In general, the magnitude of 
projected increases in annual premature deaths in these 
studies was in the hundreds to thousands by mid-century, and 
thousands to tens of thousands by the end of the century, 
when scaled to the total U.S. population. These conclusions 
are further supported by studies at the city, county, and state 
level.18, 26, 39, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
The Third National Climate Assessment (2014 NCA) found that 
“While deaths and injuries related to cold events are projected 
to decline due to climate change, these reductions are not 
expected to compensate for the increase in heat-related 
deaths,”41 and studies published since that time have further 
supported this finding. Of those studies that examine both 
heat and cold at the national scale, only Barreca found that the 
reductions in cold deaths would more than compensate for the 
increase in heat deaths.22, 27, 38, 75, 77 Barreca’s study was novel in 
terms of its treatment of humidity, finding that weather that 
was both cold and dry, or both hot and humid, was associated 
with higher mortality. However, this treatment of humidity 
was not the cause of the difference with other studies, as 
leaving out humidity actually showed a greater benefit from 
future climate change. Instead, the author stated that the 
reduction in net deaths was a result of relying on counties 
with over 100,000 inhabitants, and that using a state-level 
model covering all U.S. deaths would lead to a prediction of 
an increase of 1.7% in mortality rates rather than a decrease 
of 0.1%. The finding by the majority of studies at a national 
scale that heat deaths will increase more than cold deaths will 
decrease is consistent with studies at smaller spatial scales.26 
Moreover, several studies provide rationales for why heat 
mortality is expected to outpace cold mortality,12, 22, 27 and some 
studies suggest that cold mortality may not be responsive to 
warming.49, 93, 94 Barnett et al. (2012) showed that cold waves 
were not generally associated with an increase in deaths 
beyond the mortality already associated with cold weather, in 
contrast to heat waves.2 
Major uncertainties
The largest remaining uncertainties concern questions 
of future adaptation, which are discussed in Key Finding 
#3. A related uncertainty involves the link between the 
temperatures measured at weather stations and the 
temperatures experienced by individuals. As long as 
the relationship between the weather station and the 
microclimate or indoor/outdoor difference remains constant, 
this should not impair projections. However, as microclimates, 
building construction, or behavior change, the relationship 
between recorded weather station temperature and actual 
temperature exposure will change. This is related to, but 
broader than, the question of adaptation. Additionally, 
there are uncertainties regarding the non-linearities of heat 
response with increasing temperatures.   
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
There is high confidence that heat deaths will very likely 
increase in the future compared to a future without climate 
change, based on high agreement and a large number of 
studies as well as consistency across scenarios and regions. 
Because there are fewer studies on winter mortality, and 
because studies exist that suggest that winter mortality is not 
strongly linked to temperatures, there is medium confidence 
that deaths due to extreme cold will very likely decrease. 
The majority of the studies that examine both heat and cold 
deaths find that the increase in heat deaths due to climate 
change will likely be larger than the decrease in cold deaths in 
most regions, but there are a limited number of such studies, 
leading to an assessment of medium confidence.  

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
58
Even Small Differences from Seasonal Average 
Temperatures Result in Illness and Death
Key Finding 2: Days that are hotter than usual in the summer 
or colder than usual in the winter are both associated with 
increased illness and death [Very High Confidence]. Mortality 
effects are observed even for small differences from seasonal 
average temperatures [High Confidence]. Because small 
temperature differences occur much more frequently than 
large temperature differences, not accounting for the effect 
of these small differences would lead to underestimating the 
future impact of climate change [Likely, High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
Two well-recognized conclusions from the literature are that 
extreme temperatures lead to illness and premature death 
and that these extreme temperatures are best described 
in relation to local average seasonal temperatures rather 
than absolute temperature values. Epidemiological studies 
find an increase in mortality at temperatures that are high 
related to the local average.9, 10, 12, 15, 17, 38 Based on absolute 
temperatures, Anderson and Bell 2011 found that cities in 
the South and Southeast were the least sensitive to heat, 
demonstrating acclimatization.9 
Illness has been linked with hot daily average temperature4, 
6, 51, 69, 71 and apparent temperature, among other metrics.3, 
66, 68, 87 Across studies, adverse health episodes were most 
strongly associated with exposures to high temperatures that 
occurred on the same day or the previous day.3, 51 However, a 
cumulative effect of heat was also observed at periods of up 
to one week after exposure, tapering off beyond seven days.69, 
105 Cardiovascular and respiratory illness has been most 
commonly examined in relation to extreme heat, but the 
association is more varied for illness than for mortality due 
to effects across age groups69, 70 and differences in morbidity 
risk associated with emergency room records versus hospital 
admissions.4, 6, 24, 51, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70 
The evidence for mortality is clearest for extreme 
temperatures, as addressed in threshold-based studies,12 
but studies that account for smaller changes in temperature 
found mortality changes even for small deviations of 
temperature.11, 27 This is consistent with studies showing a 
U-shaped relationship of temperature and mortality—while 
there may be some plateau near the optimal temperature, 
the plateau is often small, and not always coincident with 
the seasonal average temperature.11, 40 However, some of the 
individuals who die in response to elevated temperatures 
were already near death, and so the temperature event is 
sometimes considered to have “displaced” the death by 
a matter of days rather than created an additional death. 
Studies have found that this effect is generally below 50% of 
the total deaths, and is much smaller than that (10% or less) 
for the most extreme events, such as the 2003 European 
heat wave.12, 48, 49, 50 In contrast, one recent study found that in 
seven U.S. cities mortality displacement was greater than 80% 
for small temperature deviations and around 50% even for 
the 3% of warmest events in the study sample.7 
Major uncertainties
This finding reflects consideration of a number of recent 
studies17, 54 not referenced in the recent 2014 NCA.41 There 
is a consensus of studies linking extreme temperatures and 
mortality, and a growing body of literature demonstrating 
that smaller differences in temperature are also linked with 
mortality. However, the mortality displacement effect, and 
the fact that deaths that do not occur during an identified 
heat wave are less likely to be directly attributed to extreme 
heat, contribute to continuing uncertainty about the 
magnitude of the effect of temperature on mortality. 
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
There is very high confidence in the relationship between 
extreme temperatures and premature deaths due to the 
consistency and strength of the literature, particularly given 
the different study designs that produce this result. There 
is high confidence that small temperature deviations from 
normal temperatures contribute to premature mortality due 
to high agreement among those studies that have examined 
the issue. Though some studies indicate that for these small 
temperature differences, mortality displacement may play 
a larger role than for more extreme temperatures. Fewer 
studies have examined the role of these smaller temperature 
differences in projections, but the directionality of the effect 
is clear, so the determination of the authors was that not 
including this effect would likely lead to an underestimate of 
future mortality, with high confidence. 
Changing Tolerance to Extreme Heat
Key Finding 3: An increase in population tolerance to extreme 
heat has been observed over time [Very High Confidence]. 
Changes in this tolerance have been associated with increased 
use of air conditioning, improved social responses, and/or 
physiological acclimatization, among other factors [Medium 
Confidence]. Expected future increases in this tolerance will 
reduce the projected increase in deaths from heat [Very 
Likely, Very High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The increasing tolerance of the U.S. population to extreme 
heat has been shown by a number of studies.9, 10, 54 However, 
there is less confidence in attributing this increase in 
tolerance: increased prevalence and use of air conditioning, 
physiological adaptation, available green space, and improved 
social responses have all been proposed as explanatory 
factors. There have been some indications (Sheridan et al. 
2009)97 that tolerance improvements in the United States 
might have plateaued, but Bobb et al. 2014 found continuing 
improvements through 2005.54
Several approaches to including adaptation have been used 
in temperature mortality projection studies. For example, 
two studies used an “analog city” approach, where the 
response of the population to future temperatures in a 
given city is assumed to be equal to that of a city with a 
hotter present-day climate.22, 81 Another approach is to 
assume that critical temperature thresholds change by 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
59
some quantity over time.18, 91 A third approach is to calculate 
sensitivity to air conditioning prevalence in the present, and 
make assumptions about air conditioning in the future.85 In 
general, inclusion of adaptation limits the projected increase 
in deaths, sometimes modestly, other times dramatically. 
However, approaches used to account for adaptation may 
be optimistic. Historically, adaptive measures have occurred 
as a response to extreme events, and therefore could be 
expected to lag warming.39, 96 While the increase in mortality 
projected in these studies is reduced, the studies generally 
found that mortality increases compared to present day even 
under optimistic adaptation assumptions.18, 22, 81, 85 A limit 
to adaptation may be seen in that even in cities with nearly 
100% air conditioning penetration, heat deaths are observed 
today.
Major uncertainties
While studies have been published in recent years that 
include adaptation in sensitivity analyses,22 this remains 
a challenging area of research. Difficulties in attributing 
observed increases in tolerance make it challenging to project 
future changes in tolerance, whether due to autonomous 
adaptation by individuals or planned adjustments by 
governments. Extrapolation of acclimatization is limited as 
there must be an increase in temperature beyond which 
acclimatization will not be possible. 
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
There is very high confidence that a decrease in sensitivity to 
heat events has occurred based on high agreement between 
studies, but only medium confidence that this decrease is due 
to some specific combination of air conditioning prevalence, 
physiological adaptation, presence of green space, and 
improved social responses because of the challenges involved 
in attribution. There is very high confidence that mortality 
due to heat will very likely be reduced compared to a no-
adaptation scenario when adaptation is included, because 
all studies examined were in agreement with this conclusion, 
though the magnitude of this reduction is poorly constrained. 
Some Populations at Greater Risk
Key Finding 4: Older adults and children have a higher risk 
of dying or becoming ill due to extreme heat [Very High 
Confidence]. People working outdoors, the socially isolated 
and economically disadvantaged, those with chronic illnesses, 
as well as some communities of color, are also especially 
vulnerable to death or illness [Very High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The relationship between increased temperatures and deaths 
in elderly populations is well-understood. An increased risk 
of respiratory and cardiovascular death is observed in elderly 
populations during temperature extremes due to reduced 
thermoregulation.17, 42, 45, 65 
Studies cite dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, fever, heat 
stress, hyperthermia, and renal disease as the primary health 
conditions in children exposed to heat waves. Causes of heat-
related illness in children include inefficient thermoregulation, 
reduced cardiovascular output, and heightened metabolic 
rate. Children also spend a considerable amount of time 
outdoors and participating in vigorous activities.17, 42, 64, 103 A 
limited number of studies found evidence of cold-related 
mortality in children; however, no study has examined the 
relationship between cold temperature and cause-specific 
mortality.64 
Certain occupational groups that spend a great deal of time 
exposed to extreme temperatures, such as agricultural 
workers, construction workers, and electricity and pipeline 
utility workers, are at increased risk for heat- and cold-related 
illness, especially where jobs involve heavy exertion.100, 113, 114 
Lack of heat-illness-prevention programs in the workplace 
that include provisions for acclimatization was found to be a 
factor strongly associated with extreme temperature-related 
death.113
Race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status have been shown 
to impact vulnerability to temperature extremes. Several 
studies have identified non-Hispanic Black populations to 
be more vulnerable than other racial and ethnic groups 
for experiencing detrimental consequences of exposure 
to temperature extremes.17, 42, 45, 103, 110 Studies suggest 
comorbidities that enhance susceptibility to higher 
temperatures, availability and use of air conditioning, 
disparities in heat risk-related land cover characteristics, and 
other environmental justice issues contribute to increased 
vulnerability of non-Hispanic Blacks.17, 42, 108, 110, 112 
Dementia, mood disorders, neurosis and stress-related 
illnesses, and substance abuse are shown to be impacted by 
extreme heat.100, 115, 116, 117 Some medications interfere with 
thermoregulation, increasing vulnerability to heat.116
Major uncertainties
The literature available at the time of the development of the 
2014 NCA had identified a number of vulnerable populations 
that were disproportionately at risk during heat waves, 
and literature since that time has only strengthened the 
understanding of the elevated risks for these populations. 
There continues to be a need for better understanding of the 
relative importance of genetics and environmental justice 
issues with regards to the observed higher risk for non-
Hispanic Blacks, more work on understanding the risks to 
pregnant women from extreme temperature events, and a 
better understanding of the relationship between extreme 
cold vulnerabilities in populations of concern. 
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Although some details regarding causation and identifying the 
most vulnerable subpopulations still require research, there 
is a large body of literature that demonstrates the increased 
vulnerability to extreme heat of a number of groups, and 
therefore there is very high confidence that the listed 
populations of concern are at greater risk of temperature-
related death and illness. 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
60
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
This assessment relies on two metrics to communicate 
the degree of certainty in Key Findings. See Appendix 4: 
Documenting Uncertainty for more on assessments of 
likelihood and confidence.
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 43–Construction worker: © Fotosearch
Pg. 44–Large Crowd: © iStockImages.com/Ints Vikmanis
Pg. 49–Snowstorm: © iStockImages.com/Dreef
Pg. 50–Construction worker: © Fotosearch
Pg. 54–Young baseball catcher: © iStockImages.com/jpbcpa
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
61
References
1.	
Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, 
G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, M. Wehner, J. Willis, D. 
Anderson, S. Doney, R. Feely, P. Hennon, V. Kharin, T. 
Knutson, F. Landerer, T. Lenton, J. Kennedy, and R. Somer­
ville, 2014: Ch. 2: Our changing climate. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 19-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0KW5CXT 
2.	
Barnett, A.G., S. Hajat, A. Gasparrini, and J. Rocklöv, 
2012: Cold and heat waves in the United States. Environ­
mental Research, 112, 218-224.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2011.12.010 
3.	
Gronlund, C.J., A. Zanobetti, J.D. Schwartz, G.A. Welle­
nius, and M.S. O’Neill, 2014: Heat, heat waves, and hospital 
admissions among the elderly in the United States, 1992–
2006. Environmental Health Perspectives, 122, 1187-1192. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1206132 
4.	
Lavigne, E., A. Gasparrini, X. Wang, H. Chen, A. Yagou­
ti, M.D. Fleury, and S. Cakmak, 2014: Extreme ambient 
temperatures and cardiorespiratory emergency room vis­
its: Assessing risk by comorbid health conditions in a time 
series study. Environmental Health, 13, 5.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069x-13-5 
5.	
Lin, S., M. Luo, R.J. Walker, X. Liu, S.-A. Hwang, and 
R. Chinery, 2009: Extreme high temperatures and hospi­
tal admissions for respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. 
Epidemiology, 20, 738-746.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e3181ad5522 
6.	
Lippmann, S.J., C.M. Fuhrmann, A.E. Waller, and D.B. 
Richardson, 2013: Ambient temperature and emergency 
department visits for heat-related illness in North Carolina, 
2007-2008. Environmental Research, 124, 35-42.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2013.03.009 
7.	
Saha, M.V., R.E. Davis, and D.M. Hondula, 2014: Mortal­
ity displacement as a function of heat event strength in 7 
US cities. American Journal of Epidemiology, 179, 467-474. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwt264 
8.	
Smith, T.T., B.F. Zaitchik, and J.M. Gohlke, 2013: Heat 
waves in the United States: Definitions, patterns and trends. 
Climatic Change, 118, 811-825.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-012-0659-2 
9.	
Anderson, G.B. and M.L. Bell, 2011: Heat waves in the 
United States: Mortality risk during heat waves and effect 
modification by heat wave characteristics in 43 U.S. com­
munities. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 210-218. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1002313 
10.	 Guo, Y., A.G. Barnett, and S. Tong, 2012: High tempera­
tures-related elderly mortality varied greatly from year to 
year: Important information for heat-warning systems. Sci­
entific Reports, 2.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep00830 
11.	 Lee, M., F. Nordio, A. Zanobetti, P. Kinney, R. Vautard, 
and J. Schwartz, 2014: Acclimatization across space and 
time in the effects of temperature on mortality: A time-se­
ries analysis. Environmental Health, 13, 89.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069X-13-89 
12.	 Medina-Ramón, M. and J. Schwartz, 2007: Temperature, 
temperature extremes, and mortality: A study of acclimati­
sation and effect modification in 50 US cities. Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, 64, 827-833.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/oem.2007.033175 
13.	 Sherwood, S.C. and M. Huber, 2010: An adaptability lim­
it to climate change due to heat stress. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 107, 9552-9555.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0913352107 
14.	 Kent, S.T., L.A. McClure, B.F. Zaitchik, T.T. Smith, and 
J.M. Gohlke, 2014: Heat waves and health outcomes in Ala­
bama (USA): The importance of heat wave definition. Envi­
ronmental Health Perspectives, 122, 151–158.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1307262 
15.	 Kalkstein, L.S., S. Greene, D.M. Mills, and J. Samenow, 
2011: An evaluation of the progress in reducing heat-related 
human mortality in major US cities. Natural Hazards, 56, 
113-129.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11069-010-9552-3 
16.	 Zhang, K., R.B. Rood, G. Michailidis, E.M. Oswald, J.D. 
Schwartz, A. Zanobetti, K.L. Ebi, and M.S. O’Neill, 2012: 
Comparing exposure metrics for classifying ‘dangerous 
heat’ in heat wave and health warning systems. Environ­
ment International, 46, 23-29.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2012.05.001 
17.	 Berko, J., D.D. Ingram, S. Saha, and J.D. Parker, 2014: 
Deaths Attributed to Heat, Cold, and Other Weather Events 
in the United States, 2006–2010. National Health Statis­
tics Reports No. 76, July 30, 2014, 15 pp. National Center 
for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr076.pdf

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
62
18.	 Gosling, S.N., J.A. Lowe, G.R. McGregor, M. Pelling, and 
B.D. Malamud, 2009: Associations between elevated atmo­
spheric temperature and human mortality: A critical review 
of the literature. Climatic Change, 92, 299-341.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s10584-008-9441-x 
19.	 WHO, 2004: International Statistical Classification of Dis­
eases and Related Health Problems, 10th Revision (ICD–10), 
2nd ed. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/ICD-10_2nd_ed_
volume2.pdf
20.	 CDC, 2005: Extreme Cold: A Prevention Guide to Promote 
Your Personal Health and Safety. 13 pp. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. http://www.bt.cdc.gov/disas­
ters/winter/pdf/extreme-cold-guide.pdf
21.	 CDC, 2006: Hypothermia-related deaths – United States, 
1999-2002 and 2005. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 55, 282-284.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/mm5510a5.htm
22.	 Mills, D., J. Schwartz, M. Lee, M. Sarofim, R. Jones, M. 
Lawson, M. Duckworth, and L. Deck, 2015: Climate 
change impacts on extreme temperature mortality in select 
metropolitan areas in the United States. Climatic Change, 
131, 83-95.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1154-8 
23.	 Bustinza, R., G. Lebel, P. Gosselin, D. Bélanger, and F. Che­
bana, 2013: Health impacts of the July 2010 heat wave in 
Quebec, Canada. BMC Public Health, 13, 56.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-56 
24.	 Knowlton, K., M. Rotkin-Ellman, G. King, H.G. Margolis, 
D. Smith, G. Solomon, R. Trent, and P. English, 2009: The 
2006 California heat wave: Impacts on hospitalizations and 
emergency department visits. Environmental Health Perspec­
tives, 117, 61-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.11594 
25.	 Ye, X., R. Wolff, W. Yu, P. Vaneckova, X. Pan, and S. Tong, 
2012: Ambient temperature and morbidity: A review of epi­
demiological evidence. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
120, 19-28.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1003198 
26.	 Li, T., R.M. Horton, and P.L. Kinney, 2013: Projections of 
seasonal patterns in temperature-related deaths for Manhat­
tan, New York. Nature Climate Change, 3, 717-721.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1902
27.	 Schwartz, J.D., M. Lee, P.L. Kinney, S. Yang, D. Mills, M. 
Sarofim, R. Jones, R. Streeter, A. St. Juliana, J. Peers, and 
R.M. Horton, 2015: Projections of temperature-attributable 
premature deaths in 209 U.S. cities using a cluster-based 
Poisson approach. Environmental Health, 14.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/s12940-015-0071-2 
28.	 CDC, 1994: Heat-related deaths--Philadelphia and United 
States, 1993-1994. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 43, 453-455.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/00031773.htm
29.	 CDC, 1995: Heat-related mortality – Chicago, July 1995. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 44, 
577-579.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrht­
ml/00038443.htm
30.	 Hoshiko, S., P. English, D. Smith, and R. Trent, 2010: A 
simple method for estimating excess mortality due to heat 
waves, as applied to the 2006 California heat wave. Interna­
tional Journal of Public Health, 55, 133-137.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s00038-009-0060-8 
31.	 Jones, T.S., A.P. Liang, E.M. Kilbourne, M.R. Griffin, P.A. 
Patriarca, S.G. Fite Wassilak, R.J. Mullan, R.F. Herrick, D. 
Donnell, Jr., K. Choi, and S.B. Thacker, 1982: Morbidity 
and mortality associated with the July 1980 heat wave in St 
Louis and Kansas City, Mo. JAMA: The Journal of the Amer­
ican Medical Association, 247, 3327–3331.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.1982.03320490025030 
32.	 Jones, S., M. Griffin, A. Liang, and P. Patriarca, 1980: The 
Kansas City Heat Wave, July 1980: Effects of Health, Pre­
liminary Report. Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, GA.
33.	 Karl, T.R. and R.W. Knight, 1997: The 1995 Chicago heat 
wave: How likely is a recurrence? Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 78, 1107-1119.  http://dx.doi.org/10
.1175/1520-0477(1997)078%3C1107:tchwhl%3E2.0.co;2
34.	 EPA, 2014: Climate Change Indicators in the United States, 
2014. 3rd edition. EPA 430-R-14-04, 107 pp. U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. http://www.
epa.gov/climatechange/pdfs/climateindicators-full-2014.pdf
35.	 Kaiser, R., A. Le Tertre, J. Schwartz, C.A. Gotway, W.R. 
Daley, and C.H. Rubin, 2007: The effect of the 1995 heat 
wave in Chicago on all-cause and cause-specific mortality. 
American Journal of Public Health, 97, S158-S162.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2006.100081 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
63
36.	 Harlan, S.L., J.H. Declet-Barreto, W.L. Stefanov, and D.B. 
Petitti, 2013: Neighborhood effects on heat deaths: Social 
and environmental predictors of vulnerability in Maricopa 
County, Arizona. Environmental Health Perspectives, 121, 
197-204.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104625 
37.	 Madrigano, J., M.A. Mittleman, A. Baccarelli, R. Gold­
berg, S. Melly, S. von Klot, and J. Schwartz, 2013: Tem­
perature, myocardial infarction, and mortality: Effect 
modification by individual- and area-level characteristics. 
Epidemiology, 24, 439-446.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e3182878397 
38.	 Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone, 2011: Climate change, 
mortality, and adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctu­
ations in weather in the US. American Economic Journal: 
Applied Economics, 3, 152-185.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
app.3.4.152 
39.	 Hayhoe, K., S. Sheridan, L. Kalkstein, and S. Greene, 2010: 
Climate change, heat waves, and mortality projections for 
Chicago. Journal of Great Lakes Research, 36, 65-73.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jglr.2009.12.009 
40.	 Gasparrini, A., Y. Guo, M. Hashizume, E. Lavigne, A. 
Zanobetti, J. Schwartz, A. Tobias, S. Tong, J. Rocklöv, B. 
Forsberg, M. Leone, M. De Sario, M.L. Bell, Y.-L.L. Guo, 
C.-f. Wu, H. Kan, S.-M. Yi, M. de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio 
Coelho, P.H.N. Saldiva, Y. Honda, H. Kim, and B. Arm­
strong, 2015: Mortality risk attributable to high and low 
ambient temperature: A multicountry observational study. 
The Lancet, 386, 369-375.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(14)62114-0 
41.	 Luber, G., K. Knowlton, J. Balbus, H. Frumkin, M. Hayden, 
J. Hess, M. McGeehin, N. Sheats, L. Backer, C.B. Beard, K.L. 
Ebi, E. Maibach, R.S. Ostfeld, C. Wiedinmyer, E. Zielins­
ki-Gutiérrez, and L. Ziska, 2014: Ch. 9: Human health. Cli­
mate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National 
Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. 
Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washing­
ton, D.C., 220-256.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0PN93H5 
42.	 Basu, R. and J.M. Samet, 2002: Relation between elevated 
ambient temperature and mortality: A review of the epi­
demiologic evidence. Epidemiologic Reviews, 24, 190-202. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxf007 
43.	 Vanos, J.K., L.S. Kalkstein, and T.J. Sanford, 2015: Detect­
ing synoptic warming trends across the US midwest and 
implications to human health and heat-related mortality. 
International Journal of Climatology, 35, 85-96.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/joc.3964 
44.	 Dixon, P.G., D.M. Brommer, B.C. Hedquist, A.J. Kalkstein, 
G.B. Goodrich, J.C. Walter, C.C. Dickerson, S.J. Penny, and 
R.S. Cerveny, 2005: Heat mortality versus cold mortality: A 
study of conflicting databases in the United States. Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society, 86, 937-943.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1175/bams-86-7-937 
45.	 Anderson, B.G. and M.L. Bell, 2009: Weather-related mor­
tality: How heat, cold, and heat waves affect mortality in 
the United States. Epidemiology, 20, 205-213.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e318190ee08 
46.	 Analitis, A., P. Michelozzi, D. D’Ippoliti, F. de’Dona­
to, B. Menne, F. Matthies, R.W. Atkinson, C. Iñiguez, X. 
Basagaña, A. Schneider, A. Lefranc, A. Paldy, L. Bisanti, 
and K. Katsouyanni, 2014: Effects of heat waves on mor­
tality: Effect modification and confounding by air pollut­
ants. Epidemiology, 25, 15-22.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e31828ac01b 
47.	 Madrigano, J., D. Jack, G.B. Anderson, M.L. Bell, and 
P.L. Kinney, 2015: Temperature, ozone, and mortality in 
urban and non-urban counties in the Northeastern Unit­
ed States. Environmental Health, 14, 3.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069X-14-3 
48.	 Kalkstein, L.S., 1998: Climate and human mortality: Rela­
tionships and mitigating measures. Advances in Bioclima­
tology, 5, 161-177.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
80419-9_7 
49.	 Kinney, P.L., M. Pascal, R. Vautard, and K. Laaidi, 2012: 
Winter mortality in a changing climate: Will it go down? 
Bulletin Epidemiologique Hebdomadaire, 12-13, 5-7.  
50.	 Le Tertre, A., A. Lefranc, D. Eilstein, C. Declercq, S. Medi­
na, M. Blanchard, B. Chardon, P. Fabre, L. Filleul, J.-F. 
Jusot, L. Pascal, H. Prouvost, S. Cassadou, and M. Ledrans, 
2006: Impact of the 2003 heatwave on all-cause mortality 
in 9 French cities. Epidemiology, 17, 75-79.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.ede.0000187650.36636.1f 
51.	 Anderson, G.B., F. Dominici, Y. Wang, M.C. McCormack, 
M.L. Bell, and R.D. Peng, 2013: Heat-related emergen­
cy hospitalizations for respiratory diseases in the Medicare 
population. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical 
Care Medicine, 187, 1098-103.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.201211-1969OC 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
64
52.	 Zanobetti, A., M.S. O’Neill, C.J. Gronlund, and J.D. 
Schwartz, 2012: Summer temperature variability and long-
term survival among elderly people with chronic disease. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 6608-
6613.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113070109 
53.	 Hanna, E.G. and P.W. Tait, 2015: Limitations to thermo­
regulation and acclimatization challenge human adaptation 
to global warming. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 12, 8034-8074.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph120708034 
54.	 Bobb, J.F., R.D. Peng, M.L. Bell, and F. Dominici, 2014: 
Heat-related mortality and adaptation to heat in the Unit­
ed States. Environmental Health Perspectives, 122, 811-816. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307392 
55.	 Petkova, E.P., A. Gasparrini, and P.L. Kinney, 2014: Heat 
and mortality in New York City since the beginning of the 
20th century. Epidemiology, 25, 554-560.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/ede.0000000000000123 
56.	 Hondula, D.M., R.C. Balling, Jr., J.K. Vanos, and M. Geor­
gescu, 2015: Rising temperatures, human health, and the 
role of adaptation. Current Climate Change Reports, 1, 144-
154.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40641-015-0016-4 
57.	 Stone, B.J., J. Vargo, P. Liu, D. Habeeb, A. DeLucia, M. 
Trail, Y. Hu, and A. Russell, 2014: Avoided heat-related 
mortality through climate adaptation strategies in three US 
cities. PLoS ONE, 9, e100852.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0100852 
58.	 CDC, 2015: Emergency Preparedness and Response: 
Extreme Heat. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA. http://www.bt.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat/
59.	 EPA, 2015: Natural Disasters: Extreme Heat. U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. http://epa.
gov/naturaldisasters/extremeheat.html
60.	 Fischer, E.M. and R. Knutti, 2015: Anthropogenic con­
tribution to global occurrence of heavy-precipitation and 
high-temperature extremes. Nature Climate Change, 5, 560-
564.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2617 
61.	 Davis, R.E., P.C. Knappenberger, W.M. Novicoff, and P.J. 
Michaels, 2003: Decadal changes in summer mortality in 
US cities. International Journal of Biometeorology, 47, 166-
175.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00484-003-0160-8 
62.	 Hess, J.J., S. Saha, and G. Luber, 2014: Summertime acute 
heat illness in U.S. emergency departments from 2006 
through 2010: Analysis of a nationally representative sample. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 122, 1209-1215.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1306796 
63.	 Noe, R.S., J.O. Jin, and A.F. Wolkin, 2012: Exposure to nat­
ural cold and heat: Hypothermia and hyperthermia medi­
care claims, United States, 2004–2005. American Journal of 
Public Health, 102, e11-e18.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
ajph.2011.300557 
64.	 Xu, Z., R.A. Etzel, H. Su, C. Huang, Y. Guo, and S. Tong, 
2012: Impact of ambient temperature on children’s health: 
A systematic review. Environmental Research, 117, 120-131. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2012.07.002 
65.	 Åström, D.O., F. Bertil, and R. Joacim, 2011: Heat wave 
impact on morbidity and mortality in the elderly popula­
tion: A review of recent studies. Maturitas, 69, 99-105. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.03.008 
66.	 Basu, R., D. Pearson, B. Malig, R. Broadwin, and R. Green, 
2012: The effect of high ambient temperature on emergen­
cy room visits. Epidemiology, 23, 813-820.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e31826b7f97 
67.	 Green, R.S., R. Basu, B. Malig, R. Broadwin, J.J. Kim, 
and B. Ostro, 2010: The effect of temperature on hospital 
admissions in nine California counties. International Journal 
of Public Health, 55, 113-121.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00038-009-0076-0 
68.	 Ostro, B., S. Rauch, R. Green, B. Malig, and R. Basu, 2010: 
The effects of temperature and use of air conditioning on 
hospitalizations. American Journal of Epidemiology, 172, 
1053-1061.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwq231 
69.	 Schwartz, J., J.M. Samet, and J.A. Patz, 2004: Hospital 
admissions for heart disease: The effects of temperature 
and humidity. Epidemiology, 15, 755-761.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.ede.0000134875.15919.0f 
70.	 Turner, L.R., A.G. Barnett, D. Connell, and S. Tong, 2012: 
Ambient temperature and cardiorespiratory morbidity: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiology, 23, 594-
606.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e3182572795 
71.	 Fletcher, B.A., S. Lin, E.F. Fitzgerald, and S.A. Hwang, 
2012: Association of summer temperatures with hospital 
admissions for renal diseases in New York State: A case-cross­
over study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 175, 907-916. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwr417 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
65
72.	 Li, B., S. Sain, L.O. Mearns, H.A. Anderson, S. Kovats, K.L. 
Ebi, M.Y.V. Bekkedal, M.S. Kanarek, and J.A. Patz, 2012: 
The impact of extreme heat on morbidity in Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin. Climatic Change, 110, 959-976.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-011-0120-y 
73.	 Alessandrini, E., S. Zauli Sajani, F. Scotto, R. Miglio, S. 
Marchesi, and P. Lauriola, 2011: Emergency ambulance dis­
patches and apparent temperature: A time series analysis in 
Emilia–Romagna, Italy. Environmental Research, 111, 1192-
1200.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2011.07.005 
74.	 Huang, C., A.G. Barnett, X. Wang, P. Vaneckova, G. Fitz­
Gerald, and S. Tong, 2011: Projecting future heat-relat­
ed mortality under climate change scenarios: A systematic 
review. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 1681-1690. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/Ehp.1103456 
75.	 Barreca, A.I., 2012: Climate change, humidity, and mortal­
ity in the United States. Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management, 63, 19-34.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeem.2011.07.004 
76.	 Greene, S., L.S. Kalkstein, D.M. Mills, and J. Samenow, 
2011: An examination of climate change on extreme heat 
events and climate–mortality relationships in large U.S. cit­
ies. Weather, Climate, and Society, 3, 281-292.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/WCAS-D-11-00055.1 
77.	 Honda, Y., M. Kondo, G. McGregor, H. Kim, Y.-L. Guo, 
Y. Hijioka, M. Yoshikawa, K. Oka, S. Takano, S. Hales, and 
R.S. Kovats, 2014: Heat-related mortality risk model for cli­
mate change impact projection. Environmental Health and 
Preventive Medicine, 19, 56-63.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12199-013-0354-6 
78.	 Voorhees, A.S., N. Fann, C. Fulcher, P. Dolwick, B. Hubbell, 
B. Bierwagen, and P. Morefield, 2011: Climate change-re­
lated temperature impacts on warm season heat mortality: 
A proof-of-concept methodology using BenMAP. Environ­
mental Science & Technology, 45, 1450-1457.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/es102820y 
79.	 Wu, J., Y. Zhou, Y. Gao, J.S. Fu, B.A. Johnson, C. Huang, 
Y.-M. Kim, and Y. Liu, 2014: Estimation and uncertainty 
analysis of impacts of future heat waves on mortality in the 
eastern United States. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
122, 10-16.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1306670 
80.	 Peng, R.D., J.F. Bobb, C. Tebaldi, L. McDaniel, M.L. Bell, 
and F. Dominici, 2011: Toward a quantitative estimate of 
future heat wave mortality under global climate change. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 701-706.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1002430 
81.	 Knowlton, K., B. Lynn, R.A. Goldberg, C. Rosenzweig, 
C. Hogrefe, J.K. Rosenthal, and P.L. Kinney, 2007: Pro­
jecting heat-related mortality impacts under a changing 
climate in the New York City region. American Journal of 
Public Health, 97, 2028-2034.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
Ajph.2006.102947 
82.	 Petkova, E.P., R.M. Horton, D.A. Bader, and P.L. Kin­
ney, 2013: Projected heat-related mortality in the U.S. 
urban northeast. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 10, 6734-6747.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph10126734 
83.	 Isaksen, T.B., M. Yost, E. Hom, and R. Fenske, 2014: Project­
ed health impacts of heat events in Washington State associ­
ated with climate change. Reviews on Environmental Health, 
29, 119-123.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2014-0029 
84.	 Jackson, J.E., M.G. Yost, C. Karr, C. Fitzpatrick, B.K. Lamb, 
S.H. Chung, J. Chen, J. Avise, R.A. Rosenblatt, and R.A. 
Fenske, 2010: Public health impacts of climate change in 
Washington State: Projected mortality risks due to heat 
events and air pollution. Climatic Change, 102, 159-186. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-010-9852-3 
85.	 Ostro, B., S. Rauch, and S. Green, 2011: Quantifying the 
health impacts of future changes in temperature in Califor­
nia. Environmental Research, 111, 1258-1264.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2011.08.013 
86.	 Petkova, E.P., D.A. Bader, G.B. Anderson, R.M. Horton, K. 
Knowlton, and P.L. Kinney, 2014: Heat-related mortality in 
a warming climate: Projections for 12 U.S. cities. Internation­
al Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11, 
11371-11383.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph111111371 
87.	 Lin, S., W.-H. Hsu, A.R. Van Zutphen, S. Saha, G. Luber, 
and S.-A. Hwang, 2012: Excessive heat and respiratory 
hospitalizations in New York State: Estimating current and 
future public health burden related to climate change. Envi­
ronmental Health Perspectives, 120, 1571-1577.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104728 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
66
88.	 Brikowski, T.H., Y. Lotan, and M.S. Pearle, 2008: Climate-re­
lated increase in the prevalence of urolithiasis in the United 
States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 
9841-9846.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0709652105 
89.	 Fakheri, R.J. and D.S. Goldfarb, 2011: Ambient tempera­
ture as a contributor to kidney stone formation: Implications 
of global warming. Kidney International, 79, 1178-1185. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ki.2011.76 
90.	 Tasian, G.E., J.E. Pulido, A. Gasparrini, C.S. Saigal, B.P. 
Horton, J.R. Landis, R. Madison, and R. Keren, 2014: Daily 
mean temperature and clinical kidney stone presentation in 
five U.S. metropolitan areas: A time-series analysis. Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 122, 1081-1087.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1307703 
91.	 Watkiss, P. and A. Hunt, 2012: Projection of economic 
impacts of climate change in sectors of Europe based on bot­
tom up analysis: Human health. Climatic Change, 112, 101-
126.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0342-z 
92.	 Mercer, J.B., 2003: Cold—an underrated risk factor for 
health. Environmental Research, 92, 8-13.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/s0013-9351(02)00009-9 
93.	 Ebi, K.L. and D. Mills, 2013: Winter mortality in a warm­
ing climate: A reassessment. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Climate Change, 4, 203-212.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.211 
94.	 Kinney, P.L., J. Schwartz, M. Pascal, E. Petkova, A. Le Tertre, 
S. Medina, and R. Vautard, 2015: Winter season mortality: 
Will climate warming bring benefits? Environmental Research 
Letters, 10, 064016.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/10/6/064016 
95.	 Davis, R.E., P.C. Knappenberger, W.M. Novicoff, and P.J. 
Michaels, 2002: Decadal changes in heat-related human 
mortality in the eastern United States. Climate Research, 22, 
175-184.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3354/cr022175 
96.	 Ebi, K.L., T.J. Teisberg, L.S. Kalkstein, L. Robinson, and 
R.F. Weiher, 2004: Heat watch/warning systems save lives: 
Estimated costs and benefits for Philadelphia 1995–98. Bul­
letin of the American Meteorological Society, 85, 1067-1073. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/bams-85-8-1067 
97.	 Sheridan, S.C., A.J. Kalkstein, and L.S. Kalkstein, 2009: 
Trends in heat-related mortality in the United States, 
1975–2004. Natural Hazards, 50, 145-160.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-008-9327-2 
98.	 Kovats, R.S. and S. Hajat, 2008: Heat stress and pub­
lic health: A critical review. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 29, 41-55.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
publhealth.29.020907.090843 
99.	 Gamble, J.L., B.J. Hurley, P.A. Schultz, W.S. Jaglom, N. 
Krishnan, and M. Harris, 2013: Climate change and old­
er Americans: State of the science. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 121, 15-22.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1205223 
100.	 Balbus, J.M. and C. Malina, 2009: Identifying vulner­
able subpopulations for climate change health effects in 
the United States. Journal of Occupational and Environ­
mental Medicine, 51, 33-37.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
JOM.0b013e318193e12e 
101.	 Benmarhnia, T., S. Deguen, J.S. Kaufman, and A. Smar­
giassi, 2015: Review article: Vulnerability to heat-related 
mortality: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-re­
gression analysis. Epidemiology, 26, 781-793.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000375 
102.	 CDC, 2011: Extreme Heat and Your Health: Heat and 
Infants and Children. Centers for Disease Control and Pre­
vention, Atlanta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/extremeheat/chil­
dren.html
103.	 Wasilevich, E.A., F. Rabito, J. Lefante, and E. Johnson, 
2012: Short-term outdoor temperature change and emer­
gency department visits for asthma among children: A 
case-crossover study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 176, 
S123-S130.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kws326 
104.	 Kerr, Z.Y., D.J. Casa, S.W. Marshall, and R.D. Comstock, 
2013: Epidemiology of exertional heat illness among U.S. 
high school athletes. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
44, 8-14.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.09.058 
105.	 Basu, R., B. Malig, and B. Ostro, 2010: High ambient tem­
perature and the risk of preterm delivery. American Journal of 
Epidemiology, 172, 1108-1117.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
aje/kwq170 
106.	 Carolan-Olah, M. and D. Frankowska, 2014: High environ­
mental temperature and preterm birth: A review of the evi­
dence. Midwifery, 30, 50-59.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
midw.2013.01.011 
107.	 Beltran, A.J., J. Wu, and O. Laurent, 2014: Associations of 
meteorology with adverse pregnancy outcomes: A systematic 
review of preeclampsia, preterm birth and birth weight. Inter­
national Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 
11, 91-172.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110100091 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
67
108.	 Uejio, C.K., O.V. Wilhelmi, J.S. Golden, D.M. Mills, S.P. 
Gulino, and J.P. Samenow, 2011: Intra-urban societal vul­
nerability to extreme heat: The role of heat exposure and 
the built environment, socioeconomics, and neighbor­
hood stability. Health & Place, 17, 498-507.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2010.12.005 
109.	 Ramin, B. and T. Svoboda, 2009: Health of the homeless 
and climate change. Journal of Urban Health, 86, 654-664. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11524-009-9354-7 
110.	 Gronlund, C.J., 2014: Racial and socioeconomic disparities 
in heat-related health effects and their mechanisms: A review. 
Current Epidemiology Reports, 1, 165-173.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s40471-014-0014-4 
111.	 Hansen, A., L. Bi, A. Saniotis, and M. Nitschke, 2013: Vul­
nerability to extreme heat and climate change: Is ethnicity a 
factor? Global Health Action, 6.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/
gha.v6i0.21364 
112.	 O’Neill, M.S., A. Zanobetti, and J. Schwartz, 2005: Dispar­
ities by race in heat-related mortality in four US cities: The 
role of air conditioning prevalence. Journal of Urban Health, 
82, 191-197.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jurban/jti043 
113.	 Arbury, S., B. Jacklitsch, O. Farquah, M. Hodgson, G. 
Lamson, H. Martin, and A. Profitt, 2014: Heat illness and 
death among workers – United States, 2012-2013. MMWR. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 661-665.  http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6331a1.htm
114.	 Lundgren, K., K. Kuklane, C. Gao, and I. Holmer, 2013: 
Effects of heat stress on working populations when fac­
ing climate change. Industrial Health, 51, 3-15.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.2486/indhealth.2012-0089 <Go to ISI>://
WOS:000314383700002
115.	 Hansen, A., P. Bi, M. Nitschke, P. Ryan, D. Pisaniello, and G. 
Tucker, 2008: The effect of heat waves on mental health in a 
temperate Australian city. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
116, 1369-1375.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.11339 
116.	 Martin-Latry, K., M.P. Goumy, P. Latry, C. Gabinski, B. 
Bégaud, I. Faure, and H. Verdoux, 2007: Psychotropic 
drugs use and risk of heat-related hospitalisation. European 
Psychiatry, 22, 335-338.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eurp­
sy.2007.03.007 
117.	 Page, L.A., S. Hajat, R.S. Kovats, and L.M. Howard, 
2012: Temperature-related deaths in people with psycho­
sis, dementia and substance misuse. The British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 200, 485-490.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.
bp.111.100404 
118.	 Ranson, M., 2014: Crime, weather, and climate change. 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 67, 
274-302.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2013.11.008 
119.	 Dunne, J.P., R.J. Stouffer, and J.G. John, 2013: Reductions 
in labour capacity from heat stress under climate warm­
ing. Nature Climate Change, 3, 563-566.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate1827 
120.	 Graff Zivin, J. and M. Neidell, 2014: Temperature and 
the allocation of time: Implications for climate change. 
Journal of Labor Economics, 32, 1-26.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/671766 
121.	 Sheridan, S.C. and T.J. Dolney, 2003: Heat, mortality, 
and level of urbanization: Measuring vulnerability across 
Ohio, USA. Climate Research, 24, 255-265.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3354/cr024255 
122.	 Orlowsky, B. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2012: Global changes in 
extreme events: Regional and seasonal dimension. Climatic 
Change, 10, 669-696.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
011-0122-9 
123.	 Robeson, S.M., C.J. Willmott, and P.D. Jones, 2014: 
Trends in hemispheric warm and cold anomalies. Geo­
physical Research Letters, 41, 9065-9071.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/2014gl062323 
124.	 Liu, J., M. Song, R.M. Horton, and Y. Hu, 2013: Reduc­
ing spread in climate model projections of a September 
ice-free Arctic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences, 110, 12571-12576.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1219716110 
125.	 Liu, J., J.A. Curry, H. Wang, M. Song, and R.M. Horton, 
2012: Impact of declining Arctic sea ice on winter snowfall. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 4074-
4079.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114910109 
126.	 Francis, J.A. and S.J. Vavrus, 2012: Evidence linking Arc­
tic amplification to extreme weather in mid-latitudes. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 39, L06801.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1029/2012GL051000 

2–TEMPERATURE-RELATED DEATH AND ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
68
127.	 Barnes, E.A., 2013: Revisiting the evidence linking Arctic 
amplification to extreme weather in midlatitudes. Geophysical 
Research Letters, 40, 4734-4739.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
grl.50880 
128.	 Wallace, J.M., I.M. Held, D.W.J. Thompson, K.E. Tren­
berth, and J.E. Walsh, 2014: Global warming and winter 
weather. Science, 343, 729-730.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.343.6172.729 
129.	 Gosling, S.N., G.R. McGregor, and J.A. Lowe, 2009: Cli­
mate change and heat-related mortality in six cities Part 
2: Climate model evaluation and projected impacts from 
changes in the mean and variability of temperature with 
climate change. International Journal of Biometeorology, 53, 
31-51.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00484-008-0189-9
End

AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
3
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
U.S. Global Change Research Program
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
Lead Author
Neal Fann
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Contributing Authors
Terry Brennan
Camroden Associates, Inc.
Patrick Dolwick 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Janet L. Gamble 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Vito Ilacqua 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Laura Kolb
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Christopher G. Nolte
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Tanya L. Spero
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Lewis Ziska
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Recommended Citation: Fann, N., T. Brennan, P. Dolwick, J.L. Gamble, V. Ilacqua, L. Kolb, C.G. Nolte, T.L. Spero, and L. Ziska, 2016: Ch. 
3: Air Quality Impacts. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global 
Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 69–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.10.7930/J0GQ6VP6 
Acknowledgements: Susan Anenberg, U.S. Chemical Safety Board; Amanda Curry Brown, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; William 
Fisk, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; Patrick Kinney, Columbia University; Daniel Malashock,* U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service; David Mudarri, CADMUS; Sharon Phillips, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Marcus C. 
Sarofim,* U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;
*Chapter Coordinators

70
AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
3
Key Findings 
Exacerbated Ozone Health Impacts 
Key Finding 1: Climate change will make it harder for any given regulatory approach to reduce ground-level 
ozone pollution in the future as meteorological conditions become increasingly conducive to forming ozone 
over most of the United States [Likely, High Confidence]. Unless offset by additional emissions reductions of 
ozone precursors, these climate-driven increases in ozone will cause premature deaths, hospital visits, lost 
school days, and acute respiratory symptoms [Likely, High Confidence].
Increased Health Impacts from Wildfires
Key Finding 2: Wildfires emit fine particles and ozone precursors that in turn increase the risk of premature 
death and adverse chronic and acute cardiovascular and respiratory health outcomes [Likely, High 
Confidence]. Climate change is projected to increase the number and severity of naturally occurring wildfires 
in parts of the United States, increasing emissions of particulate matter and ozone precursors and resulting 
in additional adverse health outcomes [Likely, High Confidence].
Worsened Allergy and Asthma Conditions 
Key Finding 3: Changes in climate, specifically rising temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and 
increasing concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide, are expected to contribute to increases in the 
levels of some airborne allergens and associated increases in asthma episodes and other allergic illnesses 
[High Confidence].

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
71
3.1	 Introduction 
Changes in the climate affect the air we breathe, both indoors 
and outdoors. Taken together, changes in the climate affect 
air quality through three pathways—via outdoor air pollution, 
aeroallergens, and indoor air pollution. The changing climate 
has modified weather patterns, which in turn have influenced 
the levels and location of outdoor air pollutants such as 
ground-level ozone (O3) and fine particulate matter.1, 2, 3, 4 In­
creasing carbon dioxide (CO2) levels also promote the growth 
of plants that release airborne allergens (aeroallergens). Final­
ly, these changes to outdoor air quality and aeroallergens also 
affect indoor air quality as both pollutants and aeroallergens 
infiltrate homes, schools, and other buildings. 
Climate change influences outdoor air pollutant concentra­
tions in many ways (Figure 1). The climate influences tempera­
tures, cloudiness, humidity, the frequency and intensity of 
precipitation, and wind patterns,5 each of which can influ­
ence air quality. At the same time, climate-driven changes in 
meteorology can also lead to changes in naturally occurring 
emissions that influence air quality (for example, wildfires, 
wind-blown dust, and emissions from vegetation). Over longer 
time scales, human responses to climate change may also 
affect the amount of energy that humans use, as well as how 
land is used and where people live. These changes would in 
turn modify emissions (depending on the fuel source) and 
thus further influence air quality.6, 7 Some air pollutants such 
as ozone, sulfates, and black carbon also cause changes in 
Figure 1: This conceptual diagram for an outdoor air quality example illustrates the key pathways by which humans are exposed to 
health threats from climate drivers, and potential resulting health outcomes (center boxes). These exposure pathways exist within the 
context of other factors that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that influence vulnerability 
for individuals are shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. Key factors that influence 
vulnerability at larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and management, and institutions, are shown in the 
left box. All of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s vulnerability through changes in exposure, sensitivity, 
and adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change. See Chapter 1: Introduction for more information.
Climate Change and Health—Outdoor Air Quality

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
72
climate.8 However, this chapter does not consider the climate 
effects of air pollutants, remaining focused on the health 
effects resulting from climate-related changes in air pollution 
exposure.
Poor air quality, whether outdoors or indoors, can negative­
ly affect the human respiratory and cardiovascular systems. 
Outdoor ground-level ozone and particle pollution can have 
a range of adverse effects on human health. Current levels of 
ground-level ozone have been estimated to be responsible 
for tens of thousands of hospital and emergency room visits, 
millions of cases of acute respiratory symptoms and school 
absences, and thousands of premature deaths each year 
in the United States.9, 10 Fine 
particle pollution has also been 
linked to even greater health 
consequences through harmful 
cardiovascular and respiratory 
effects.11 
A changing climate can also 
influence the level of aeroal­
lergens such as pollen, which 
in turn adversely affect human 
health. Rising levels of CO2 and resulting climate changes alter 
the production, allergenicity (a measure of how much particu­
lar allergens, such as ragweed, affect people), distribution, and 
seasonal timing of aeroallergens. These changes increase the 
severity and prevalence of allergic diseases in humans. Higher 
pollen concentrations and longer pollen seasons can increase 
allergic sensitization and asthma episodes and thereby limit 
productivity at work and school.
Finally, climate change may alter the indoor concentrations of 
pollutants generated outdoors (such as ground-level ozone), 
particulate matter, and aeroallergens (such as pollen). Changes 
in the climate may also increase pollutants generated indoors, 
such as mold and volatile organic compounds. Most of the 
air people breathe over their lifetimes will be indoors, since 
people spend the vast majority of their time in indoor environ­
ments. Thus, alterations in indoor air pollutant concentrations 
from climate change have important health implications.
3.2	 Climate Impacts on Outdoor Air Pollutants and 
Health
Changes in the climate affect air pollution levels.8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 Human-caused climate change has the potential 
to increase ozone levels,1, 4 may have already increased ozone 
pollution in some regions of the United States,3 and has the 
potential to affect future concentrations of ozone and fine par­
ticles (particulate matter smaller 
than 2.5 microns in diameter, 
referred to as PM2.5).2, 7 Climate 
change and air quality are both 
affected by, and influence, sev­
eral factors; these include the 
levels and types of pollutants 
emitted, how land is used, the 
chemistry governing how these 
pollutants form in the atmo­
sphere, and weather conditions. 
Ground-Level Ozone
Ozone levels and subsequent ozone-related health impacts de­
pend on 1) the amount of pollutants emitted that form ozone, 
and 2) the meteorological conditions that help determine 
the amount of ozone produced from those emissions. Both 
of these factors are expected to change in the future. The 
emissions of pollutants from anthropogenic (of human origin) 
sources that form ozone (that is, ozone “precursors”) are 
expected to decrease over the next few decades in the United 
States.23 However, irrespective of these changes in emissions, 
climate change will result in meteorological conditions more 
favorable to forming ozone. Consequently, attaining national 
air quality standards for ground-level ozone will also be more 
difficult, as climate changes offset some of the improvements 
that would otherwise be expected from emissions reductions. 
This effect is referred to as the “climate penalty.”7, 24 
Meteorological conditions influencing ozone levels include air 
temperatures, humidity, cloud cover, precipitation, wind trajec­
tories, and the amount of vertical mixing in the atmosphere.1, 
2, 25, 26 Higher temperatures can increase the chemical rates at 
which ozone is formed and increase ozone precursor emissions 
from anthropogenic sources and biogenic (vegetative) sources. 
Lower relative humidity reduces cloud cover and rainfall, pro­
moting the formation of ozone and extending ozone lifetime in 
the atmosphere. A changing climate will also modify wind pat­
terns across the United States, which will influence local ozone 
levels. Over much of the country, the worst ozone episodes tend 
to occur when the local air mass does not change over a period 
of several days, allowing ozone and ozone precursor emissions 
Higher pollen concentrations and longer pollen seasons can 
increase allergic sensitization and asthma episodes.
Human-caused climate change has the 
potential to increase ozone levels, may have 
already increased ozone pollution in some 
regions of the United States, and has the 
potential to affect future concentrations of 
ozone and fine particles.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
73
to accumulate over time.27, 28 Climate change is already increas­
ing the frequency of these types of stagnation events over parts 
of the United States,3 and further increases are projected.29 
Ozone concentrations near the ground are strongly influenced 
by upward and downward movement of air (“vertical mixing”). 
For example, high concentrations of ozone near the ground of­
ten occur in urban areas when there is downward movement of 
air associated with high pressure (“subsidence”), reducing the 
extent to which locally emitted pollutants are diluted in the at­
mosphere.30 In addition, high concentrations of ozone can occur 
in some rural areas resulting from downward transport of ozone 
from the stratosphere or upper troposphere to the ground.31
Aside from the direct meteorological influences, there are also 
indirect impacts on U.S. ozone levels from other climate-in­
fluenced factors. For instance, higher water vapor concentra­
tions due to increased temperatures will increase the natural 
rate of ozone depletion, particularly in remote areas,32 thus 
decreasing the baseline level of ozone. Additionally, potential 
climate-driven increases in nitrogen oxides (NOx) created by 
lightning or increased exchange of naturally produced ozone 
in the stratosphere to the troposphere could also affect ozone 
in those areas of the country most influenced by background 
ozone concentrations.33 Increased occurrences of wildfires due 
to climate change can also lead to increased ozone concentra­
tions near the ground.34  
There is natural year-to-year variability in temperature and 
other meteorological factors that influence ozone levels.7 
While global average temperature over 30-year climatic times­
cales is expected to increase, natural interannual variability 
will continue to play a significant role in year-to-year changes 
in temperature.35 Over the next several decades, the influence 
of climate change on meteorological parameters affecting 
average levels of ozone is expected to be smaller than the 
natural interannual variability.36 
To address these issues, most assessments of climate impacts 
on meteorology and associated ozone formation concurrently 
simulate global and regional chemical transport over multiple 
years using “coupled” models. This approach can isolate the 
influence of meteorology in forming ozone from the effect of 
changes in emissions. The consensus of these model-based 
assessments is that accelerated rates of photochemical reac­
tion, increased occurrence of stagnation events, and other 
direct meteorological influences are likely to lead to higher 
levels of ozone over large portions of the United States.8, 14, 16, 17 
At the same time, ozone levels in certain regions are projected 
to decrease as a result of climate change, likely due to localized 
increases in cloud cover, precipitation, and/or increased dilution 
resulting from deeper mixed layers. These climate-driven chang­
es in projected ozone vary by season and location, with climate 
and air quality models showing the most consistency in ozone 
increases due to climate change in the northeastern United 
States.8, 37 
Generally, ozone levels will likely increase across the United 
States if ozone precursors are unchanged (see "Research High­
light: Ozone-Related Health Effects" on page 74).4, 7, 8 This cli­
mate penalty for ozone will offset some of the expected health 
benefits that would otherwise result from the expected ongoing 
reductions of ozone precursor emissions, and could prompt the 
need for adaptive measures (for example, additional ozone pre­
cursor emissions reductions) to meet national air quality goals. 
Ozone (O3) is a compound that occurs naturally in Earth’s atmosphere but is also formed by human activities. In 
the stratosphere (10–50 kilometers above the Earth’s surface), O3 prevents harmful solar ultraviolet radiation from 
reaching the Earth’s surface. Near the surface, however, O3 irritates the respiratory system. Ground-level O3, a key 
component of smog, is formed by chemical interactions between sunlight and pollutants including nitrogen oxides 
(NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The emissions leading to O3 formation can result from both human 
sources (for example, motor vehicles and electric power generation) and natural sources (for example, vegetation 
and wildfires). Occasionally, O3 that is created naturally in the stratosphere can be mixed downward and contribute 
to O3 levels near the surface. Once formed, O3 can be transported by the wind before eventually being removed from 
the atmosphere via chemical reactions or by depositing on the surface. 
At any given location, O3 levels are influenced by complex interactions between emissions and meteorological 
conditions. Generally, higher temperatures, sunnier skies, and lighter winds lead to higher O3 concentrations by 
increasing the rate of chemical reactions and by decreasing the extent to which pollutants are mixed with “clean” 
(less polluted) background air. 
For a given level of emissions of O3 precursors, climate change is generally expected to increase O3 pollution in the 
future throughout much of the United States, in part due to higher temperatures and more frequent stagnant air 
conditions.7 Unless offset by additional emissions reductions of ozone precursors, these climate-driven increases in 
O3 will cause premature deaths, hospital visits, lost school days, and acute respiratory symptoms.14
What is Ozone?

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
74
Research Highlight: Ozone-Related Health Effects
Importance: Ozone is formed in the atmosphere by photochemical reactions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
and nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the presence of sunlight. Although U.S. air quality policies are projected to reduce 
VOC and NOx emissions,56 climate change will increase the frequency of regional weather patterns conducive to 
increasing ground-level ozone, partially offsetting the expected improvements in air quality. 
Objective: Project the number and geographic distribution of additional ozone-related illnesses and premature 
deaths in the contiguous United States due to climate change between 2000 and 2030 under projected U.S. air 
quality policies.
Method: Climate scenarios from two global climate models (GCMs) using two different emissions pathways 
(RCP8.5 and RCP6.0) were dynamically downscaled following Otte et al. (2012)57 and used with emissions 
projections for 2030 and a regional chemical transport model to simulate air quality in the contiguous United 
States. The resulting changes in ozone in each scenario were then used to compute regional ozone-related health 
effects attributable to climate change. Ozone-related health impacts were estimated using the environmental 
Benefits Mapping and Analysis Program–Community Edition (BenMAP–CE). Population exposure was estimated 
using projected population data from the Integrated Climate and Land Use Scenarios (ICLUS). Further details can 
be found in Fann et al. (2015).14
Results: The two downscaled GCM projections result in 1°C to 4°C (1.8°F to 7.2°F) increases in average daily 
maximum temperatures and 1 to 5 parts per billion increases in daily 8-hour maximum ozone in 2030 throughout 
the contiguous United States. As seen in previous modeling analyses of climate impacts on ozone, the air quality 
response to climate change can vary substantially by region and across scenarios.22, 58 Unless reductions in ozone 
precursor emissions offset the influence of climate change, this climate penalty of increased ozone concentrations 
due to climate change would result in tens to thousands of additional ozone-related illnesses and premature 
deaths per year. 
Los Angeles, California, May 22, 2012. Unless offset by additional emissions reductions of ozone precursors, climate-driven
increases in ozone will cause premature deaths, hospital visits, lost school days, and acute respiratory symptoms.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
75
Research Highlight: Ozone-Related Health Effects, continued
Conclusions: Future climate change will result in higher ozone levels in polluted regions of the contiguous 
United States. This study isolates the effect of climate change on ozone by using the same emissions of ozone 
precursors for both 2000-era and 2030-era climate. In addition, this study uses the latest generation of GCM 
scenarios and represents the most comprehensive analysis of climate-related, ozone-attributable health effects 
in 2030, and includes not only deaths but also emergency department admissions for asthma, hospital visits for 
respiratory causes, acute respiratory symptoms, and missed days of school. These results are subject to important 
uncertainties and limitations. The ozone-climate modeling reflects two scenarios (based on two separate GCMs) 
considered. Several emissions categories that are important in the formation of ozone and that could be affected 
by climate, such as motor vehicles, electrical generating units, and wildfires, were left unchanged between the 
current and future periods. The analysis applied concentration–response relationships from epidemiology studies 
of historical air pollution episodes; this both implies that the relationship between air pollution and risk will 
remain constant into the future and that populations will not attempt to reduce their exposure to ozone. 
Projected Change in Temperature, Ozone, and Ozone-Related Premature Deaths in 2030
Figure 2. Projected changes in average daily maximum temperature (degrees Fahrenheit), summer average maximum daily 
8-hour ozone (parts per billion), and excess ozone-related deaths (incidences per year by county) in the year 2030 relative to 
the year 2000, following two global climate models and two greenhouse gas concentration pathways, known as Representative 
Concentration Pathways, or RCPs (see van Vuuren et al. 201149). Each year (2000 and 2030) is represented by 11 years of 
modeled data for May through September, the traditional ozone season in the United States. 
The top panels are based on the National Center for Atmospheric Research/Department of Energy (NCAR/DOE) Community 
Earth System Model (CESM) following RCP8.5 (a higher greenhouse gas concentration pathway), and the bottom panels are 
based on the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) ModelE2-R 
following RCP6.0 (a moderate greenhouse gas concentration pathway). 
The leftmost panels are based on dynamically downscaled regional climate using the NCAR Weather Research and Forecasting 
(WRF) model, the center panels are based on air quality simulations from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model, and the rightmost panels are based on the U.S. EPA Environmental Benefits 
and Mapping Program (BenMAP). 
Fann et al. 2015 reports a range of mortality outcomes based on different methods of computing the mortality effects of ozone 
changes—the changes in the number of deaths shown in the rightmost panels were computed using the method described in 
Bell et al. 2004.14, 38 (Figure source: adapted from Fann et al. 2015)14

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
76
Air pollution epidemiology studies describe the relationship 
between a population’s historical exposure to air pollutants 
and the risk of adverse health outcomes. Populations exposed 
to ozone air pollution are at greater risk of dying prematurely, 
being admitted to the hospital for respiratory hospital ad­
missions, being admitted to the emergency department, and 
suffering from aggravated asthma, among other impacts.38, 39, 40 
Air pollution health impact assessments combine risk estimates 
from these epidemiology studies with modeled changes in 
future or historical air quality changes to estimate the number 
of air-pollution-related premature deaths and illness.41 Future 
ozone-related human health impacts attributable to climate 
change are projected to lead to hundreds to thousands of pre­
mature deaths, hospital admissions, and cases of acute respira­
tory illnesses per year in the United States in 2030.14, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46
Health outcomes that can be attributed to climate change 
impacts on air pollution are sensitive to a number of factors 
noted above—including the climate models used to describe 
meteorological changes (including precipitation and cloud 
cover), the models simulating air quality levels (including 
wildfire incidence), the size and distribution of the population 
exposed, and the health status of that population (which in­
fluences their susceptibility to air pollution; see Ch. 1: Intro­
duction).42, 47, 48, 49 Moreover, there is emerging evidence that 
air pollution can interact with climate-related stressors such as 
temperature to affect the human physiological response to air 
pollution.39, 42, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55 For example, the risk of dying from 
exposure to a given level of ozone may increase on warmer 
days.51
Particulate Matter
Particulate matter (PM) is a complex mixture of solid- or 
liquid-phase substances in the atmosphere that arise from 
both natural and human sources. Principal constituents of PM 
include sulfate, nitrate, ammonium, organic carbon, elemen­
tal carbon, sea salt, and dust. These particles (also known as 
aerosols) can either be directly emitted or can be formed in 
the atmosphere from gas-phase precursors. PM smaller than 
2.5 microns in diameter (PM2.5) is associated with serious 
chronic and acute health effects, including lung cancer, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cardiovascular disease, 
and asthma development and exacerbation.11 The elderly are 
particularly sensitive to short-term particle exposure, with a 
higher risk of hospitalization and death.59, 60 
As is the case for ozone, atmospheric PM2.5 concentrations 
depend on emissions and on meteorology. Emissions of sulfur 
dioxide (SO2), NOx, and black carbon are projected to decline 
substantially in the United States over the next few decades 
due to regulatory controls,56, 61, 62, 63 which will lead to reduc­
tions in sulfate and nitrate aerosols. 
Projected Change in Ozone-Related Premature Deaths
Figure 3. Projected change in ozone-related premature deaths from 2000 to 2030 by U.S. region and based on CESM/
RCP8.5. Each year (2000 and 2030) is represented by 11 years of modeled data. Ozone-related premature deaths were 
calculated using the risk coefficient from Bell et al. (2004).38 Boxes indicate 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile change over 11-
year sample periods, and vertical lines extend to 1.5 times the interquartile range. U.S. regions follow geopolitical boundaries 
shown in Figure 2. (Figure source: Fann et al. 2015)14
Research Highlight: Ozone-Related Health Effects, continued

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
77
Climate change is expected to alter several meteorological 
factors that affect PM2.5, including precipitation patterns and 
humidity, although there is greater consensus regarding the 
effects of meteorological changes on ozone than on PM2.5.2 
Several factors, such as increased humidity, increased stag­
nation events, and increased biogenic emissions are likely to 
increase PM2.5 levels, while increases in precipitation, en­
hanced atmospheric mixing, and other factors could decrease 
PM2.5 levels.2, 8, 37, 64 Because of the strong influence of changes 
in precipitation and atmospheric mixing on PM2.5 levels, and 
because there is more variability in projected changes to those 
variables, there is no consensus yet on whether meteorolog­
ical changes will lead to a net increase or decrease in PM2.5 
levels in the United States.2, 8, 17, 21, 22, 64, 65 
As a result, while it is clear that PM2.5 accounts for most of the 
health burden of outdoor air pollution in the United States,10 
the health effects of climate-induced changes in PM2.5 are 
poorly quantified. Some studies have found that changes in 
PM2.5 will be the dominant driver of air quality-related health 
effects due to climate change,44 while others have suggested 
a potentially more significant health burden from changes in 
ozone.50 
PM resulting from natural sources (such as plants, wildfires, 
and dust) is sensitive to daily weather patterns, and those fluc­
tuations can affect the intensity of extreme PM episodes (see 
also Ch. 4: Extreme Events, Section 4.6).8 Wildfires are a major 
source of PM, especially in the western United States during 
summer.66, 67, 68 Because winds carry PM2.5 and ozone precursor 
gases, air pollution from wildfires can affect people even far 
downwind from the fire location.35, 69 PM2.5 from wildfires af­
fects human health by increasing the risk of premature death 
and hospital and emergency department visits.70, 71, 72 
Climate change has already led to an increased frequency 
of large wildfires, as well as longer durations of individual 
wildfires and longer wildfire seasons in the western United 
States.73 Future climate change is projected to increase wild­
fire risks74, 75 and associated emissions, with harmful impacts 
on health.76 The area burned by wildfires in North America is 
expected to increase dramatically over the 21st century due to 
climate change.77, 78 By 2050, changes in wildfires in the west­
ern United States are projected to result in 40% increases of 
organic carbon and 20% increases in elemental carbon aerosol 
concentrations.79 Wildfires may dominate summertime PM2.5 
concentrations, offsetting even large reductions in anthropo­
genic PM2.5 emissions.22 
Likewise, dust can be an important constituent of PM, espe­
cially in the southwest United States. The severity and spatial 
extent of drought has been projected to increase as a result 
of climate change,80 though the impact of increased aridity on 
airborne dust PM has not been quantified (see Ch. 4. Extreme 
Events).2 
3.3	 Climate Impacts on Aeroallergens and 
Respiratory Diseases
Climate change may alter the production, allergenicity, distri­
bution, and timing of airborne allergens (aeroallergens). These 
changes contribute to the severity and prevalence of allergic 
disease in humans. The very young, those with compromised 
immune systems, and the medically uninsured bear the brunt 
of asthma and other allergic illnesses. While aeroallergen 
exposure is not the sole, or even necessarily the most signifi­
cant factor associated with allergic illnesses, that relationship 
is part of a complex pathway that links aeroallergen expo­
sure to the prevalence of allergic illnesses, including asthma 
episodes.81, 82 On the other hand, climate change may reduce 
adverse allergic and asthmatic responses in some areas. For 
example, as some areas become drier, there is the potential 
for a shortening of the pollen season due to plant stress. 
Aeroallergens and Rates of Allergic Diseases in the United 
States 
Aeroallergens are substances present in the air that, once 
inhaled, stimulate an allergic response in sensitized individu­
als. Aeroallergens include tree, grass, and weed pollen; indoor 
and outdoor molds; and other allergenic proteins associated 
with animal dander, dust mites, and cockroaches.83 Ragweed 
is the aeroallergen that most commonly affects persons in the 
United States.84 
Allergic diseases develop in response to complex and multi­
ple interactions among both genetic and non-genetic factors, 
including a developing immune system, environmental expo­
sures (such as ambient air pollution or weather conditions), 
and socioeconomic and demographic factors.85, 86, 87 Aeroal­
lergen exposure contributes to the occurrence of asthma 
episodes, allergic rhinitis or hay fever, sinusitis, conjunctivitis, 
urticaria (hives), atopic dermatitis or eczema, and anaphylaxis 
(a severe, whole-body allergic reaction that can be life-threat­
Nearly 6.8 million children in the United States are affected by 
asthma, making it a major chronic disease of childhood.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
78
ening).84, 88 Allergic illnesses, including hay fever, affect about 
one-third of the U.S. population, and more than 34 million 
Americans have been diagnosed with asthma.81 These diseases 
have increased in the United States over the past 30 years (see 
Ch. 1 Introduction). The prevalence of hay fever has increased 
from 10% of the population in 1970 to 30% in 2000.84 Asthma 
rates have increased from approximately 8 to 55 cases per 
1,000 persons to approximately 55 to 90 cases per 1,000 per­
sons over that same time period;89 however, there is variation 
in reports of active cases of asthma as a function of geography 
and demographics.90 
Climate Impacts on Aeroallergen Characteristics 
Climate change contributes to changes in allergic illnesses as 
greater concentrations of CO2, together with higher tempera­
tures and changes in precipitation, extend the start or duration 
of the growing season, increase the quantity and allergenicity of 
pollen, and expand the spatial distribution of pollens.84, 91, 92, 93, 94 
Historical trends show that climate change has led to chang­
es in the length of the growing season for certain allergenic 
pollens. For instance, the duration of pollen release for common 
ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia) has been increasing as a 
function of latitude in recent decades in the midwestern region 
of North America (see Figure 4). Latitudinal effects on increasing 
season length were associated primarily with a delay in first 
frost during the fall season and lengthening of the frost-free 
period.95 Studies in controlled indoor environments find that 
increases in temperature and CO2 result in earlier flowering, 
greater floral numbers, greater pollen production, and in­
creased allergenicity in common ragweed.96, 97 In addition, stud­
ies using urban areas as proxies for both higher CO2 and higher 
temperatures demonstrate earlier flowering of pollen species, 
which may lead to a longer total pollen season.98, 99, 100
For trees, earlier flowering associated with higher winter and 
spring temperatures has been observed over a 50-year period 
Figure 4: Ragweed pollen season length has increased in central North America between 1995 and 2011 by as much as 11 to 27 
days in parts of the United States and Canada, in response to rising temperatures. Increases in the length of this allergenic pollen 
season are correlated with increases in the number of days before the first frost. The largest increases have been observed in 
northern cities. (Figure source: Melillo et al. 2014. Photo credit: Lewis Ziska, USDA).35
Ragweed Pollen Season Lengthens

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
79
for oak.101 Research on loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) also demon­
strates that elevated CO2 could induce earlier and greater 
seasonal pollen production.102 Annual birch (Betula) pollen pro­
duction and peak values from 2020 to 2100 are projected to be 
1.3 to 2.3 times higher, relative to average values for 2000, with 
the start and peak dates of pollen release advancing by two to 
four weeks.103 
Climate Variability and Effects on Allergic Diseases
Climate change related alterations in local weather patterns, 
including changes in minimum and maximum temperatures 
and rainfall, affect the burden of allergic diseases.104, 105, 106 The 
role of weather on the initiation or exacerbation of allergic 
symptoms in sensitive persons is not well understood.86, 107 
So-called “thunderstorm asthma” results as allergenic parti­
cles are dispersed through osmotic rupture, a phenomenon 
where cell membranes burst. Pollen grains may, after contact 
with rain, release part of their cellular contents, including 
allergen-laced fine particles. Increases in the intensity and 
frequency of heavy rainfall and storminess over the coming 
decades is likely to be associated with spikes in aeroallergen 
concentrations and the potential for related increases in the 
number and severity of allergic illnesses.108, 109
Potential non-linear interactions between aeroallergens and 
ambient air pollutants (including ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sul­
fur dioxide, and fine particulate matter) may increase health 
risks for people who are simultaneously exposed.87, 88, 106, 108, 110, 
111, 112, 113, 114 In particular, pre-exposure to air pollution (espe­
cially ozone or fine particulate matter) may magnify the effects 
of aeroallergens, as prior damage to airways may increase 
the permeability of mucous membranes to the penetration of 
allergens, although existing evidence suggests greater sensitiv­
ity but not necessarily a direct link with ozone exposure.115 A 
recent report noted remaining uncertainties across the epide­
miologic, controlled human exposure, and toxicology studies 
on this emerging topic.39
3.4	  Climate Impacts on Indoor Air Quality and 
Health: An Emerging Issue 
Climate change may worsen existing indoor air problems and 
create new problems by altering outdoor conditions that 
affect indoor conditions and by creating more favorable con­
ditions for the growth and spread of pests, infectious agents, 
and disease vectors that can migrate indoors.116 Climate 
change can also lead to changes in the mixing of outdoor and 
indoor air. Reduced mixing of outdoor and indoor air limits 
penetration of outdoor pollutants into the indoors, but also 
leads to higher concentrations of pollutants generated indoors 
since their dilution by outdoor air is decreased.
Indoor air contains a complex mixture of chemical and bio­
logical pollutants or contaminants. Contaminants that can be 
found indoors include carbon monoxide (CO), fine particles 
(PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide, formaldehyde, radon, mold, and 
pollen. Indoor air quality varies from building to building and 
over the course of a day in an individual building.
Public and environmental health professionals have known for 
decades that poor indoor air quality is associated with adverse 
respiratory and other health effects.116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 Since 
most people spend about 90% of their time indoors,122, 123, 124, 
125, 126 much of their exposures to airborne pollutants (both 
those influenced by climate change and those driven by other 
factors) happen indoors.
Outdoor Air Changes Reflected in Indoor Air 
Indoor air pollutants may come from indoor sources or may 
be transported into the building with outdoor air.127, 128 Indoor 
pollutants of outdoor origin may include ozone, dust, pollen, 
and fine PM (PM2.5). Even if a building has an outdoor air intake, 
some air will enter the building through other openings, such as 
open windows or under doors, or through cracks in the build­
ings, bypassing any filters and bringing outdoor air pollutants 
inside.129 If there are changes in airborne pollutants of outdoor 
origin, such as pollen and mold (see Section 3.3) and fine PM 
from wildfires (see "Particulate Matter" on page 76), there 
will be changes in indoor exposures to these contaminants. 
Although indoor fine PM levels from wildfires are typically lower 
than outdoors (about 50%), because people spend most of their 
time indoors, most of their exposure to and health effects from 
wildfire particles (about 80%) will come from particles inhaled 
Dampness and mold in U.S. homes are linked to approximately 
4.6 million cases of worsened asthma.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
80
indoors.130 Climate-induced changes in indoor-outdoor tem­
perature differences may somewhat reduce the overall intake 
of outdoor pollutants into buildings for certain regions and 
seasons (see “Research Highlight: Residential Infiltration and 
Indoor Air”).131 
Most exposures to high levels of ozone occur outdoors; howev­
er, indoor exposures, while lower, occur for much longer time 
periods. Indoors, ozone concentrations are usually about 10% 
to 50% of outdoor concentrations; however, since people spend 
most of their time indoors, most of their exposure to ozone is 
from indoor air.130 Thus, about 45% to 75% of a person’s overall 
exposure to ozone will occur indoors.132 About half of the health 
effects resulting from any outdoor increases in ozone (see Sec­
tion "Ground-Level Ozone" on page 72) will be due to indoor 
ozone exposures.130 The elderly and children are particularly 
sensitive to short-term ozone exposure; however, they may 
spend even more time indoors than the general population 
and consequently their exposure to ozone is at lower levels for 
longer periods than the general public.133, 134 In addition, ozone 
Research Highlight: Residential Infiltration and Indoor Air 
Importance: Indoor and outdoor air are constantly mixing as air flows through small cracks and openings in buildings 
(infiltration) in addition to any open doors, windows, and vents. Infiltration or air exchange is driven by differences 
in barometric pressure, as a result of wind, and of the temperature difference between indoor and outdoor air. The 
greater this air exchange, the more similar the composition of indoor and outdoor air. Lower air exchange rates 
accentuate the impact of indoor sources while reducing that of some outdoor pollution. As climate change increases 
the average temperature of outdoor air, while indoor air continues to be maintained at the same comfortable 
temperatures, infiltration driven by temperature differences will change as well, modifying exposure to indoor and 
outdoor air pollution sources.
Objective: Project the relative change in infiltration and its effects on exposure to indoor and outdoor air pollution 
sources for different climates in the United States, between a late-20th century reference and the middle of the 
current century, in typical detached homes. 
Method: The infiltration change projected for 2040–2070 compared to 1970–2000 was modeled for typical 
single-family residences in urban areas, using temperatures and wind speeds from eight global–regional model 
combinations for nine U.S. cities (Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, Phoenix, 
and Seattle). This analysis compares a building to itself, removing the effects of individual building characteristics 
on infiltration. Indoor temperatures were assumed unchanged between these two periods. Further details can be 
found in Ilacqua et al. 2015.131 
Results: Because current average yearly temperatures across the contiguous United States are generally below 
comfortable indoor temperatures, model results indicate that, under future warmer temperatures, infiltration 
is projected to decrease by about 5%, averaged across cities, seasons, and climate models. Exposure to some 
pollutants emitted indoors would correspondingly increase, while exposure to some outdoor air pollutants would 
decrease to some extent. Projections vary, however, among location, seasons, and climate models. In the warmer 
cities, infiltration during summer months would rise by up to 25% in some models, raising peak exposures to ozone 
and other related pollutants just when their concentrations are typically highest. Predictions of different models are 
less consistent for summer months, however, displaying more uncertainty (average modeling relative range of 14%) 
for summer than for the rest of the year, and in fact not all models predict summer infiltration increases. Modeling 
uncertainty for the rest of the year is lower than in the summer (relative range less than 6%). 
Conclusions: This study shows the potential shifts in residential exposure to indoor and outdoor air pollution sources 
driven by a changing climate.131 These conclusions can be applied to small buildings, including single-family 
homes, row houses, and small offices. Potential adaptations intended to promote energy efficiency by reducing the 
leakage area of buildings will enhance the effect of decreasing infiltration and increasing exposure to indoor sources. 
Because of its novelty and lack of additional evidence, the study results should be considered as suggestive of an 
emerging issue. If replicated by other studies, these findings would add to the evidence on the potential for climate 
change to alter indoor air quality and further emphasize the impact of indoor air sources on human health. The 
overall implications of these findings for exposure to ambient and indoor air pollution remain uncertain at present, as 
they need to be considered along with other determinants of air exchange, such as window-opening behavior, whose 
relationship with climate change remains poorly characterized.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
81
entering a building reacts with some organic compounds to 
produce secondary indoor air pollutants. These reactions lower 
indoor ozone concentrations but introduce new indoor air con­
taminants, including other respiratory irritants.135 
Climate-related increases in droughts and dust storms may 
result in increases in indoor transmission of dust-borne patho­
gens, as the dust penetrates the indoor environment. Dust con­
tains particles of biologic origin, including pollen and bacterial 
and fungal spores. Some of the particles are allergenic.136 Patho­
genic fungi and bacteria can be found in dust both indoors and 
outdoors.137 For example, in the southwestern United States, 
spores from the fungi Coccidiodes, which can cause valley fever, 
are found indoors.138 The geographic range where Coccidiodes 
is commonly found is increasing. Climate changes, including 
increases in droughts and temperatures, may be contributing 
to this spread and to a rise in valley fever (see Ch. 4: Extreme 
Events).
Legionnaires’ disease is primarily contracted from aerosolized 
water contaminated with Legionella bacteria.139 Legionella 
bacteria are naturally found outdoors in water and soil; they are 
also known to contaminate treated water systems in build­
ings,140 as well as building cooling systems such as swamp cool­
ers or cooling towers.141 Legionella can also be found indoors 
inside plumbing fixtures such as showerheads, faucets, and 
humidifiers.142, 143 Legionella can cause outbreaks of a pneumo­
nia known as Legionnaire’s disease, which is a potentially fatal 
infection.144 Exposure can occur indoors when a spray or mist 
of contaminated water is inhaled, including mist or spray from 
showers and swamp coolers.145 The spread of Legionella bacte­
ria can be affected by regional environmental factors.116 Legion­
naires’ disease is known to follow a seasonal pattern, with more 
cases in late summer and autumn, potentially due to warmer 
and damper conditions.146, 147 Cases of Legionnaires’ disease are 
rising in the United States, with an increase of 192% from 2000 
to 2009.148, 149 If climate change results in sustained higher tem­
peratures and damper conditions in some areas, there could be 
increases in the spread and transmission of Legionella. 
Contaminants Generated Indoors
Although research directly linking indoor dampness and climate 
change is not available, information on building science, climate 
change, and outdoor environmental factors that affect indoor 
air quality can be used to project how climate change may 
influence indoor environments.130 Climate change could result 
in increased indoor dampness in at least two ways: 1) if there 
are more frequent heavy precipitation events and other severe 
weather events (including high winds, flooding, and winter 
storms) that result in damage to buildings, allowing water or 
moisture entry; and 2) if outdoor humidity rises with climate 
change, indoor humidity and the potential for condensation 
and dampness will likely rise. Outdoor humidity is usually the 
largest contributor to indoor dampness on a yearly basis.127 
Increased indoor dampness and humidity will in turn increase 
indoor mold, dust mites, bacteria, and other bio-contamination 
indoors, as well as increase levels of volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) and other chemicals resulting from the off-gassing of 
damp or wet building materials.116, 119, 150 Dampness and mold 
in U.S. homes are linked to approximately 4.6 million cases of 
worsened asthma and between 8% and 20% of several common 
respiratory infections, such as acute bronchitis.151, 152 If there are 
climate-induced rises in indoor dampness, there could be in­
creases in adverse health effects related to dampness and mold, 
such as asthma exacerbation. 
Additionally, power outages due to more frequent extreme 
weather events such as flooding could lead to a number of 
health effects (see Ch 4: Extreme Events). Heating, ventilation, 
and air conditioning (HVAC) systems will not function without 
power; therefore, many buildings could have difficulty main­
taining indoor temperatures or humidity. Loss of ventilation, 
filtration, air circulation, and humidity control can lead to indoor 
mold growth and increased levels of indoor contaminants,153 
including VOCs such as formaldehyde.119, 154, 155, 156 Power outages 
are also associated with increases in hospital visits from carbon 
monoxide (CO) poisoning, primarily due to the incorrect use 
of backup and portable generators that contaminate indoor 
air with carbon monoxide.135 Following floods, CO poisoning is 
also associated with the improper indoor use of wood-burning 
appliances and other combustion appliances designed for use 
outdoors.157 There were at least nine deaths from carbon mon­
oxide poisoning related to power outages from 2000 to 2009.158
Climate factors can influence populations of rodents that pro­
duce allergens and can harbor pathogens such as hantaviruses, 
which can cause Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome. Hantavirus­
es can be spread to people by rodents that infest buildings,159 
and limiting indoor exposure is a key strategy to prevent the 
spread of hantavirus.160 Climate change may increase rodent 
populations in some areas, including indoors, particularly when 
droughts are followed by periods of heavy rain (see Ch. 4: Ex­
treme Events) and with increases in temperature and rainfall.161 
Also, extreme weather events such as heavy rains and flooding 
may drive some rodents to relocate indoors.162 Increases in 
rodent populations may result in increased indoor exposures to 
rodent allergens and related health effects.159, 163, 164 In addition, 
climate factors may also influence the prevalence of hantavirus­
es in rodents.163, 164 This is a complex dynamic, because climate 
change may influence rodent populations, ranges, and infection 
rates.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
82
3.5	 Populations of Concern
Certain groups of people may be more susceptible to 
harm from air pollution due to factors including age, 
access to healthcare, baseline health status, or other 
characteristics.60 In the contiguous United States, Blacks 
or African-Americans, women, and the elderly expe­
rience the greatest baseline risk from air pollution.165 
The young, older adults, asthmatics, and people whose 
immune systems are compromised are more vulnerable 
to indoor air pollutants than the general population.166 
Lower 
socioeconomic status and housing disrepair have been 
associated with higher indoor allergen exposures, 
though higher-income populations may be more ex­
posed to certain allergens such as dust mites.167, 168 
Nearly 6.8 million children in the United States are 
affected by asthma, making it a major chronic disease 
of childhood.169 It is also the main cause of school 
absenteeism and hospital admissions among children.83 
In 2008, 9.3% of American children age 2 to 17 years 
were reported to have asthma.169 The onset of asthma 
in children has been linked to early allergen exposure 
and viral infections, which act in concert with genetic 
susceptibility.170 Children can be particularly suscepti­
ble to allergens due to their immature respiratory and 
immune systems, as well as indoor or outdoor activities 
that contribute to aeroallergen exposure (see Table 
1).170, 171, 172, 173 
Minority adults and children also bear a dispropor­
tionate burden associated with asthma as measured 
by emergency department visits, lost work and school 
days, and overall poorer health status (see Table 1).175, 176 
Twice as many Black children had asthma-related emer­
gency department visits and hospitalizations compared 
with White children. Fewer Black and Hispanic children 
reported using preventative medication like inhaled cor­
ticosteroids (ICS) as compared to White children. Black 
and Hispanic children also had more poorly controlled 
asthma symptoms, leading to increased emergency 
department visits and greater use of rescue medications 
rather than routine daily use of ICS, regardless of symp­
tom control.173, 177
Children living in poverty were 1.75 times more likely to 
be hospitalized for asthma than their non-poor counterparts. 
When income is accounted for, no significant difference was 
observed in the rate of hospital admissions by race or ethnicity. 
This income effect may be related to access and use of health 
care and appropriate use of preventive medications such as 
ICS.178
Percentage of population with active asthma, by year and 
selected characteristics: United States, 2001 and 2010.
Characteristic
Year 2001 %
Year 2010 %
Total
7.3
8.4
Gender
Male
6.3
7.0
Female
8.3
9.8
Race
White
7.2
7.8
Black
8.4
11.9
Other
7.2
8.1
Ethnicity
Hispanic
5.8
7.2
Non-Hispanic
7.6
8.7
Age
Children (0-17)
8.7
9.3
Adults (18 and older)
6.9
8.2
Age Group
0-4 years
5.7
6.0
5-14 years
9.9
10.7
15-34 years
8.0
8.6
35-64 years
6.7
8.1
65 years and older
6.0
8.1
Region
Northeast
8.3
8.8
Midwest
7.5
8.6
South
7.1
8.3
West
6.7
8.3
Federal Poverty Threshold
Below 100%
9.9
11.2
100% to < 250%
7.7
8.7
250% to < 450%
6.8
8.2
450% or higher
6.6
7.1
 Source: Moorman et al. 2012174
Table 1: A recent study of children in California found that racial 
and ethnic minorities are more affected by asthma.175 Among 
minority children, the prevalence of asthma varies with the high­
est rates among Blacks and American Indians/Alaska Natives 
(17%), followed by non-Hispanic or non-Latino Whites (10%), 
Hispanics (7%), and Asian Americans (7%).
People with preexisting medical conditions—including hy­
pertension, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disorder—are at greater risk for outdoor air pollution-related 
health effects than the general population.179 Populations with 
irregular heartbeats (atrial fibrillation) who were exposed to air 
pollution and high temperatures experience increased risk.165 
People who live or work in buildings without air conditioning 
and other ventilation controls or in buildings that are unable to 
withstand extreme precipitation or flooding events are at great­

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
83
er risk of adverse health effects. Other health risks are related to 
exposures to poor indoor air quality from mold and other bio­
logical contaminants and chemical pollutants emitted from wet 
building materials. While the presence of air conditioning has 
been found to greatly reduce the risk of ozone-related deaths, 
communities with a higher percentage of unemployment and a 
greater population of Blacks are at greater risk.59
3.6	 Research Needs
In addition to the emerging issues identified above, the 
authors highlight the following potential areas for additional 
scientific and research activity on air quality. Understanding of 
future air quality and the ability to model future health im­
pacts associated with air quality changes—particularly PM2.5 
impacts—will be enhanced by improved modeling and projec­
tions of climate-dependent variables like wildfires and land-use 
patterns, as well as improved modeling of ecosystem responses 
to climate change. Improved collection of data on aeroallergen 
concentrations in association with other ecosystem variables 
will facilitate research and modeling of related health impacts.   
Future assessments can benefit from research activities that:
•	 enhance understanding of how interactions among cli­
mate-related factors, such as temperature or relative humid­
ity, aeroallergens, and air pollution, affect human health, and 
how to attribute health impacts to changes in these different 
risk factors;
•	 improve the ability to model and project climate change 
impacts on the formation and fate of air contaminants and 
quantify the compounded uncertainty in the projections; and
•	 identify the impacts of changes in indoor dampness, such as 
mold, other biological contaminants, volatile organic com­
pounds, and indoor air chemistry on indoor air pollutants and 
health. 

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
84
Supporting Evidence
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING CHAPTER
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. The authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the 
overall report process, see Appendices 2 and 3.
In addition, the author team held an all-day meeting at 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency National Center 
for Environmental Assessment in Crystal City, Virginia, 
on October 15, 2014, to discuss the chapter and develop 
initial drafts of the Key Findings. A quorum of the authors 
participated and represented each of the three sections of 
the chapter—outdoor air quality, aeroallergens, and indoor 
air quality. These discussions were informed by the results 
of the literature review as well as the research highlights 
focused on outdoor air quality and indoor air quality. The 
team developed Key Finding 2 in response to comments from 
the National Research Council review panel and the general 
public.
The Key Findings for outdoor ozone, wildfires, and 
aeroallergen impacts reflect strong empirical evidence linking 
changes in climate to these outcomes. When characterizing 
the human health impacts from outdoor ozone, the team 
considered the strength of the toxicological, clinical, and 
epidemiological evidence evaluated in the Ozone Integrated 
Science Assessment.39 Because there is increasing evidence 
that climate change will increase the frequency and intensity 
of wildfire events, this outcome was included as a key finding, 
despite the inability to quantify this impact with the available 
tools and data. Because altered patterns of precipitation 
and increasing levels of CO2 are anticipated to promote the 
level of aeroallergens, this outcome is also included as a 
Key Finding. Finally, because the empirical evidence linking 
climate change to indoor air quality was more equivocal, we 
identified this topic as an emerging issue. 
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Exacerbated Ozone Health Impacts
Key Finding 1: Climate change will make it harder for any 
given regulatory approach to reduce ground-level ozone 
pollution in the future as meteorological conditions become 
increasingly conducive to forming ozone over most of the 
United States [Likely, High Confidence]. Unless offset by 
additional emissions reductions of ozone precursors, these 
climate-driven increases in ozone will cause premature 
deaths, hospital visits, lost school days, and acute respiratory 
symptoms [Likely, High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
has concluded that warming of the global climate system 
is unequivocal and that continued increases in greenhouse 
gas emissions will cause further temperature increases.5, 
35 At the same time, there is a well-established relationship 
between measured temperature and monitored peak ozone 
levels in the United States.1, 25 Numerous climate and air 
quality modeling studies have also confirmed that increasing 
temperatures, along with other changes in meteorological 
variables, are likely to lead to higher peak ozone levels in the 
future over the United States,7, 37 if ozone precursor emissions 
remain unchanged.
Risk assessments using concentration–response relationships 
from the epidemiological literature and modeled air quality 
data have projected substantial health impacts associated 
with climate-induced changes in air quality.14, 42, 43, 44, 46, 50 This 
literature reports a range of potential changes in ozone-
related, non-accidental mortality due to modeled climate 
change between the present and 2030 or 2050, depending 
upon the scenario modeled, the climate and air quality 
models used, and assumptions about the concentration–
response function and future populations. Many of the 
studies suggest that tens to thousands of premature deaths 
could occur in the future due to climate change impacts on 
air quality.14, 42 At the same time, hundreds of thousands of 
days of missed school and hundreds of thousands to millions 
of cases of acute respiratory symptoms also result from the 
climate-driven ozone increases in the United States.14
Major uncertainties
Climate projections are driven by greenhouse gas emission 
scenarios, which vary substantially depending on assumptions 
for economic growth and climate change mitigation policies. 
There is significant internal variability in the climate system, 
which leads to additional uncertainties in climate projections, 
particularly on a regional basis. Ozone concentrations also 
depend on emissions that are influenced indirectly by climate 
change (for example, incidence of wildfires, changes in energy 
use, energy technology choices), which further compounds 
the uncertainty. Studies projecting human health impacts 
apply concentration–response relationships from existing 
epidemiological studies characterizing historical air quality 
changes; it is unclear how future changes in the relationship 
between air quality, population exposure, and baseline 
health may affect the concentration–response relationship. 
Finally, these studies do not account for the possibility 
of a physiological interaction between air pollutants and 
temperature, which could lead to increases or decreases in air 
pollution-related deaths and illnesses.

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
85
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Given the known relationship between temperature and 
ozone, as well as the numerous air quality modeling studies 
that suggest climate-driven meteorological changes will 
yield conditions more favorable for ozone formation in the 
future, there is high confidence that ozone levels will likely 
increase due to climate change, unless offset by reductions in 
ozone precursor emissions. Based on observed relationships 
between ozone concentrations and human health responses, 
there is high confidence that any climate-driven increases 
in ozone will likely cause additional cases of premature 
mortality, as well as increasingly frequent cases of hospital 
visits and lost school days due to respiratory impacts. 
Increased Health Impacts from Wildfires
Key Finding 2: Wildfires emit fine particles and ozone 
precursors that in turn increase the risk of premature death 
and adverse chronic and acute cardiovascular and respiratory 
health outcomes [Likely, High Confidence]. Climate change 
is projected to increase the number and severity of naturally 
occurring wildfires in parts of the United States, increasing 
emissions of particulate matter and ozone precursors and 
resulting in additional adverse health outcomes [Likely, High 
Confidence].     
Description of evidence base
The harmful effects of PM concentrations on human health 
have been well-documented, and there is equally strong 
evidence linking wildfires to higher PM concentrations 
regionally. Recent studies have established linkages between 
wildfire incidence and adverse health outcomes in the nearby 
population.70, 71 Though projections of climate change impacts 
on precipitation patterns are less certain than those on 
temperature, there is greater agreement across models that 
precipitation will decrease in the western United States.74 
Rising temperatures, decreasing precipitation, and earlier 
springtime onset of snowmelt are projected to lead to 
increased frequency and severity of wildfires.22, 75, 77
Major uncertainties
Future climate projections, especially projections of 
precipitation, are subject to considerable uncertainty. Land 
management practices, including possible adaptive measures 
taken to mitigate risk, could alter the frequency and severity 
of wildfires, the emissions from wildfires, and the associated 
human exposure to smoke.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Given the known association between PM and health 
outcomes and between wildfires and PM concentrations, 
there is high confidence that an increase in wildfire frequency  
and severity will likely lead to an increase in adverse 
respiratory and cardiac health outcomes. Based on the 
robustness of the projection by global climate models that 
precipitation amounts will decrease in parts of the United 
States, and that summer temperatures will increase, there is 
high confidence that the frequency and severity of wildfire 
occurrence will likely increase, particularly in the western 
United States.
Worsened Allergy and Asthma Conditions 
Key Finding 3: Changes in climate, specifically rising 
temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and increasing 
concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide, are expected 
to contribute to increases in the levels of some airborne 
allergens and associated increases in asthma episodes and 
other allergic illnesses [High Confidence]. 
Description of evidence base
There is a large body of evidence supporting the observation 
that climate change will alter the production, allergenicity, 
distribution, and timing of aeroallergens. Historical trends 
show that climate change has led to changes in the length 
of the growing season for certain allergenic pollens. Climate 
change also contributes to changes in allergic illnesses 
as greater concentrations of CO2, together with higher 
temperatures and changes in precipitation, extend the start 
or duration of the growing season, increase the quantity and 
allergenicity of pollen, and expand the spatial distribution of 
pollens.84, 91, 92, 93, 94 While the role of weather on the initiation 
or exacerbation of allergic symptoms in sensitive persons 
is not entirely understood,86, 107 increases in intensity and 
frequency of rainfall and storminess over the coming decades 
is expected to be associated with spikes in aeroallergen 
concentrations and the potential for related increases in the 
number and severity of allergic illnesses.108, 109 
These changes in exposure to aeroallergens contribute to 
the severity and prevalence of allergic disease in humans. 
Given that aeroallergen exposure is not the sole, or even 
necessarily the most significant, factor associated with 
allergic illnesses, that relationship is part of a complex 
pathway that links exposure to aeroallergens to the 
prevalence of allergic illnesses.81 There is consistent and 
robust evidence that aeroallergen exposure contributes 
significantly to the occurrence of asthma episodes, hay fever, 
sinusitis, conjunctivitis, hives, and anaphylaxis.84, 88 There is 
also compelling evidence that allergic diseases develop in 
response to complex and multiple interactions among both 
genetic and non-genetic factors, including a developing 
immune system, environmental exposures (such as ambient 
air pollution or weather conditions), and socioeconomic and 
demographic factors.85, 86, 87 Finally, there is evidence that 
potential non-linear interactions between aeroallergens and 
ambient air pollutants is likely to increase health risks for 
people who are simultaneously exposed.87, 88, 106, 108, 110, 111, 112, 
113, 114
Major uncertainties
The interrelationships between climate variability and 
change and exposure to aeroallergens are complex. Where 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
86
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 69 –Girl with inhaler : © Stephen Welstead/LWA/Corbis
Pg. 70–Firefighters walking in smoke: © Ted Soqui/Corbis
Pg. 72–Ragweed pollen: Courtesy of Roy Morsch/Corbis 
Pg. 74–L.A. smog: © Ringo Chiu/ZUMA Press/Corbis
Pg. 77 –Girl with inhaler : © Stephen Welstead/LWA/Corbis
Pg. 79–Moldy archway: Courtesy of Bart Everson/flickr
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10
they exist, differences in findings from across the relevant 
scientific literature may be due to study designs, references 
to certain species of pollen, geographic characteristics, 
climate variables, and degree of allergy sensitization.104 
There are also uncertainties with respect to the role of 
climate change and the extent and nature of its effects as 
they contribute to aeroallergen-related diseases, especially 
asthma.91 Existing uncertainties can be addressed through 
the development of standardized approaches for measuring 
exposures and tracking outcomes across a range of allergic 
illnesses, vulnerable populations, and geographic proximity to 
exposures.82
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence 
The scientific literature suggests that there is high confidence 
that changes in climate, including rising temperatures and 
altered precipitation patterns, will affect the concentration, 
allergenicity, season length, and spatial distribution of a 
number of aeroallergens, and these changes are expected 
to impact the prevalence of some allergic diseases, including 
asthma attacks.
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
This assessment relies on two metrics to communicate 
the degree of certainty in Key Findings. See Appendix 4: 
Documenting Uncertainty for more on assessments of 
likelihood and confidence.

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
87
References
1.	
Bloomer, B.J., J.W. Stehr, C.A. Piety, R.J. Salawitch, 
and R.R. Dickerson, 2009: Observed relationships of 
ozone air pollution with temperature and emissions. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 36, L09803.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1029/2009gl037308 
2.	
Dawson, J.P., B.J. Bloomer, D.A. Winner, and C.P. Weaver, 
2014: Understanding the meteorological drivers of U.S. par­
ticulate matter concentrations in a changing climate. Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society, 95, 521-532.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-12-00181.1 
3.	
Leibensperger, E.M., L.J. Mickley, and D.J. Jacob, 2008: 
Sensitivity of US air quality to mid-latitude cyclone frequen­
cy and implications of 1980–2006 climate change. Atmo­
spheric Chemistry and Physics, 8, 7075-7086.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5194/acp-8-7075-2008 
4.	
Weaver, C.P., E. Cooter, R. Gilliam, A. Gilliland, A. 
Grambsch, D. Grano, B. Hemming, S.W. Hunt, C. Nolte, 
D.A. Winner, X.-Z. Liang, J. Zhu, M. Caughey, K. Kun­
kel, J.-T. Lin, Z. Tao, A. Williams, D.J. Wuebbles, P.J. 
Adams, J.P. Dawson, P. Amar, S. He, J. Avise, J. Chen, R.C. 
Cohen, A.H. Goldstein, R.A. Harley, A.L. Steiner, S. Tonse, 
A. Guenther, J.-F. Lamarque, C. Wiedinmyer, W.I. Gus­
tafson, L.R. Leung, C. Hogrefe, H.-C. Huang, D.J. Jacob, 
L.J. Mickley, S. Wu, P.L. Kinney, B. Lamb, N.K. Larkin, D. 
McKenzie, K.-J. Liao, K. Manomaiphiboon, A.G. Russell, 
E. Tagaris, B.H. Lynn, C. Mass, E. Salathé, S.M. O’Neill, 
S.N. Pandis, P.N. Racherla, C. Rosenzweig, and J.-H. Woo, 
2009: A preliminary synthesis of modeled climate change 
impacts on U.S. regional ozone concentrations. Bulletin of 
the American Meteorological Society, 90, 1843-1863.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1175/2009BAMS2568.1 
5.	
IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assess­
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, 
S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and 
P.M. Midgley (Eds.), 1535 pp. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY. http://www.climat­
echange2013.org
6.	
Bernard, S.M., J.M. Samet, A. Grambsch, K.L. Ebi, and I. 
Romieu, 2001: The potential impacts of climate variabili­
ty and change on air pollution-related health effects in the 
United States. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109, 199-
209. PMC1240667 
7.	
Jacob, D.J. and D.A. Winner, 2009: Effect of climate change 
on air quality. Atmospheric Environment, 43, 51-63.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.09.051 
8.	
Fiore, A.M., V. Naik, D.V. Spracklen, A. Steiner, N. Unger, 
M. Prather, D. Bergmann, P.J. Cameron-Smith, I. Cionni, 
W.J. Collins, S. Dalsøren, V. Eyring, G.A. Folberth, P. 
Ginoux, L.W. Horowitz, B. Josse, J.-F. Lamarque, I.A. 
MacKenzie, T. Nagashima, F.M. O’Connor, M. Righi, S.T. 
Rumbold, D.T. Shindell, R.B. Skeie, K. Sudo, S. Szopa, T. 
Takemura, and G. Zeng, 2012: Global air quality and cli­
mate. Chemical Society Reviews, 41, 6663-6683.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1039/C2CS35095E 
9.	
Anenberg, S.C., I.J. West, A.M. Fiore, D.A. Jaffe, M.J. Prath­
er, D. Bergmann, K. Cuvelier, F.J. Dentener, B.N. Duncan, 
M. Gauss, P. Hess, J.E. Jonson, A. Lupu, I.A. Mackenzie, E. 
Marmer, R.J. Park, M.G. Sanderson, M. Schultz, D.T. Shin­
dell, S. Szopa, M.G. Vivanco, O. Wild, and G. Zeng, 2009: 
Intercontinental impacts of ozone pollution on human mor­
tality. Environmental Science & Technology, 43, 6482-6287. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es900518z 
10.	 Fann, N., A.D. Lamson, S.C. Anenberg, K. Wesson, D. 
Risley, and B.J. Hubbell, 2012: Estimating the national 
public health burden associated with exposure to ambient 
PM2.5 and ozone. Risk Analysis, 32, 81-95.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2011.01630.x 
11.	 EPA, 2009: Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate 
Matter. EPA/600/R-08/139F. National Center for Environ­
mental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Trian­
gle Park, NC. http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.
cfm?deid=216546
12.	 Chang, H.H., J. Zhou, and M. Fuentes, 2010: Impact of cli­
mate change on ambient ozone level and mortality in south­
eastern United States. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 7, 2866-2880.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph7072866 
13.	 Chang, H.H., H. Hao, and S.E. Sarnat, 2014: A statistical 
modeling framework for projecting future ambient ozone 
and its health impact due to climate change. Atmospheric 
Environment, 89, 290-297.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2014.02.037 
14.	 Fann, N., C.G. Nolte, P. Dolwick, T.L. Spero, A. Curry 
Brown, S. Phillips, and S. Anenberg, 2015: The geographic 
distribution and economic value of climate change-related 
ozone health impacts in the United States in 2030. Journal 
of the Air & Waste Management Association, 65, 570-580. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2014.996270 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
88
15.	 Jackson, J.E., M.G. Yost, C. Karr, C. Fitzpatrick, B.K. Lamb, 
S.H. Chung, J. Chen, J. Avise, R.A. Rosenblatt, and R.A. 
Fenske, 2010: Public health impacts of climate change in 
Washington State: Projected mortality risks due to heat 
events and air pollution. Climatic Change, 102, 159-186. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-010-9852-3 
16.	 Kelly, J., P.A. Makar, and D.A. Plummer, 2012: Projections 
of mid-century summer air-quality for North America: 
Effects of changes in climate and precursor emissions. Atmo­
spheric Chemistry and Physics, 12, 5367-5390.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5194/acp-12-5367-2012 
17.	 Penrod, A., Y. Zhang, K. Wang, S.-Y. Wu, and L.R. Leung, 
2014: Impacts of future climate and emission changes on 
U.S. air quality. Atmospheric Environment, 89, 533-547. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.01.001 
18.	 Pfister, G.G., S. Walters, J.F. Lamarque, J. Fast, M.C. Barth, 
J. Wong, J. Done, G. Holland, and C.L. Bruyère, 2014: Pro­
jections of future summertime ozone over the U.S. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119, 5559-5582.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/2013JD020932 
19.	 Sheffield, P.E., J.L. Carr, P.L. Kinney, and K. Knowlton, 2011: 
Modeling of regional climate change effects on ground-level 
ozone and childhood asthma. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 41, 251-257.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ame­
pre.2011.04.017 
20.	 Sheffield, P.E., K.R. Weinberger, and P.L. Kinney, 2011: 
Climate change, aeroallergens, and pediatric allergic disease. 
Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine, 78, 78-84.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/msj.20232 
21.	 Tai, A.P.K., L.J. Mickley, and D.J. Jacob, 2012: Impact 
of 2000–2050 climate change on fine particulate matter 
(PM2.5) air quality inferred from a multi-model analysis 
of meteorological modes. Atmospheric Chemistry and Phys­
ics, 12, 11329-11337.  http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/acp-12-
11329-2012 
22.	 Val Martin, M., C.L. Heald, J.F. Lamarque, S. Tilmes, L.K. 
Emmons, and B.A. Schichtel, 2015: How emissions, climate, 
and land use change will impact mid-century air quality over 
the United States: A focus on effects at National Parks. Atmo­
spheric Chemistry and Physics, 15, 2805-2823.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5194/acp-15-2805-2015 
23.	 EPA, 2014: Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed 
Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
for Ground-Level Ozone. EPA-452/P-14-006. U.S. Envi­
ronmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation, 
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research 
Triangle 
Park, 
NC. 
http://epa.gov/ttn/ecas/regdata/
RIAs/20141125ria.pdf
24.	 Wu, S., L.J. Mickley, E.M. Leibensperger, D.J. Jacob, D. 
Rind, and D.G. Streets, 2008: Effects of 2000–2050 global 
change on ozone air quality in the United States. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 113, D06302.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1029/2007JD008917 
25.	 Camalier, L., W. Cox, and P. Dolwick, 2007: The effects of 
meteorology on ozone in urban areas and their use in assess­
ing ozone trends. Atmospheric Environment, 41, 7127-7137. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2007.04.061 
26.	 Davis, J., W. Cox, A. Reff, and P. Dolwick, 2011: A compar­
ison of CMAQ-based and observation-based statistical mod­
els relating ozone to meteorological parameters. Atmospheric 
Environment, 45, 3481-3487.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2010.12.060 
27.	 Leung, L.R. and W.I. Gustafson, Jr., 2005: Potential 
regional climate change and implications to U.S. air qual­
ity. Geophysical Research Letters, 32, L16711.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1029/2005GL022911 
28.	 Zhu, J. and X.-Z. Liang, 2013: Impacts of the Bermuda high 
on regional climate and ozone over the United states. Jour­
nal of Climate, 26, 1018-1032.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/
JCLI-D-12-00168.1 
29.	 Horton, D.E., Harshvardhan, and N.S. Diffenbaugh, 2012: 
Response of air stagnation frequency to anthropogeni­
cally enhanced radiative forcing. Environmental Research 
Letters, 7, 044034.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/7/4/044034 
30.	 Haman, C.L., E. Couzo, J.H. Flynn, W. Vizuete, B. Heffron, 
and B.L. Lefer, 2014: Relationship between boundary layer 
heights and growth rates with ground-level ozone in Hous­
ton, Texas. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119, 
6230-6245.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2013JD020473 
31.	 Zhang, L., D.J. Jacob, X. Yue, N.V. Downey, D.A. Wood, 
and D. Blewitt, 2014: Sources contributing to background 
surface ozone in the US Intermountain West. Atmospher­
ic Chemistry and Physics, 14, 5295-5309.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5194/acp-14-5295-2014 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
89
32.	 Murazaki, K. and P. Hess, 2006: How does climate change 
contribute to surface ozone change over the United States? 
Journal of Geophysical Research - Atmospheres, 111, D05301. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2005JD005873 
33.	 Kirtman, B., S.B. Power, J.A. Adedoyin, G.J. Boer, R. Bojar­
iu, I. Camilloni, F.J. Doblas-Reyes, A.M. Fiore, M. Kimoto, 
G.A. Meehl, M. Prather, A. Sarr, C. Schär, R. Sutton, G.J. 
van Oldenborgh, G. Vecchi, and H.J. Wang, 2013: Near-
term climate change: Projections and predictability. Climate 
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Work­
ing Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern­
mental Panel on Climate Change. Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. 
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. 
Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley, Eds. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 953–1028. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.023 
34.	 Stavros, E.N., D. McKenzie, and N. Larkin, 2014: The 
climate-wildfire-air quality system: Interactions and feed­
backs across spatial and temporal scales. Wiley Interdisci­
plinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5, 719-733.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/wcc.303 
35.	 Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 
36.	 Rieder, H.E., A.M. Fiore, L.W. Horowitz, and V. Naik, 
2015: Projecting policy-relevant metrics for high summer­
time ozone pollution events over the eastern United States 
due to climate and emission changes during the 21st century. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 120, 784-800. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2014JD022303 
37.	 Fiore, A.M., V. Naik, and E.M. Leibensperger, 2015: Air 
quality and climate connections. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association, 65, 645-686.  http://dx.doi.org/10
.1080/10962247.2015.1040526 
38.	 Bell, M.L., A. McDermott, S.L. Zeger, J.M. Samet, and F. 
Dominici, 2004: Ozone and short-term mortality in 95 US 
urban communities, 1987-2000. JAMA: The Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 292, 2372-2378.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1001/jama.292.19.2372 
39.	 EPA, 2013: Integrated Science Assessment for Ozone and 
Related Photochemical Oxidants. EPA 600/R-10/076F, 
1251 pp. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National 
Center for Environmental Assessment, Office of Research 
and Development, Research Triangle Park, NC. http://
cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/isa/recordisplay.cfm?deid=247492
40.	 Jerrett, M., R.T. Burnett, C.A. Pope, K. Ito, G. Thurston, D. 
Krewski, Y. Shi, E. Calle, and M. Thun, 2009: Long-term 
ozone exposure and mortality. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 360, 1085-1095.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa0803894 
41.	 Hubbell, B., N. Fann, and J. Levy, 2009: Methodologi­
cal considerations in developing local-scale health impact 
assessments: Balancing national, regional, and local data. 
Air Quality, Atmosphere & Health, 2, 99-110.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11869-009-0037-z 
42.	 Post, E.S., A. Grambsch, C. Weaver, P. Morefield, J. Huang, 
L.-Y. Leung, C.G. Nolte, P. Adams, X.-Z. Liang, J.-H. Zhu, 
and H. Mahone, 2012: Variation in estimated ozone-related 
health impacts of climate change due to modeling choices 
and assumptions. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120, 
1559-1564.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104271 
43.	 Selin, N.E., S. Wu, K.M. Nam, J.M. Reilly, S. Paltsev, R.G. 
Prinn, and M.D. Webster, 2009: Global health and econom­
ic impacts of future ozone pollution. Environmental Research 
Letters, 4, 044014.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/4/4/044014 
44.	 Tagaris, E., K.-J. Liao, A.J. DeLucia, L. Deck, P. Amar, and 
A.G. Russell, 2009: Potential impact of climate change on 
air pollution-related human health effects. Environmen­
tal Science & Technology, 43, 4979-4988.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/es803650w 
45.	 Garcia-Menendez, F., R.K. Saari, E. Monier, and N.E. Selin, 
2015: U.S. air quality and health benefits from avoided 
climate change under greenhouse gas mitigation. Environ­
mental Science & Technology, 49, 7580-7588.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01324 
46.	 Bell, M.L., R. Goldberg, C. Hogrefe, P.L. Kinney, K. 
Knowlton, B. Lynn, J. Rosenthal, C. Rosenzweig, and J.A. 
Patz, 2007: Climate change, ambient ozone, and health in 
50 US cities. Climatic Change, 82, 61-76.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-006-9166-7 
47.	 Riahi, K., S. Rao, V. Krey, C. Cho, V. Chirkov, G. Fisch­
er, G. Kindermann, N. Nakicenovic, and P. Rafaj, 2011: 
RCP 8.5—A scenario of comparatively high greenhouse 
gas emissions. Climatic Change, 109, 33-57.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-011-0149-y 
48.	 Taylor, K.E., R.J. Stouffer, and G.A. Meehl, 2012: An over­
view of CMIP5 and the experiment design. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society, 93, 485-498.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00094.1 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
90
49.	 van Vuuren, D.P., J. Edmonds, M. Kainuma, K. Riahi, A. 
Thomson, K. Hibbard, G.C. Hurtt, T. Kram, V. Krey, J.-F. 
Lamarque, T. Masui, M. Meinshausen, N. Nakicenovic, S.J. 
Smith, and S.K. Rose, 2011: The representative concentra­
tion pathways: An overview. Climatic Change, 109, 5-31. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z 
50.	 Jacobson, M.Z., 2008: On the causal link between carbon 
dioxide and air pollution mortality. Geophysical Research Let­
ters, 35, L03809.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2007GL031101 
51.	 Jhun, I., N. Fann, A. Zanobetti, and B. Hubbell, 2014: 
Effect modification of ozone-related mortality risks by tem­
perature in 97 US cities. Environment International, 73, 128-
134.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.07.009 
52.	 Ren, C., G.M. Williams, K. Mengersen, L. Morawska, and 
S. Tong, 2008: Does temperature modify short-term effects 
of ozone on total mortality in 60 large eastern US communi­
ties? An assessment using the NMMAPS data. Environment 
International, 34, 451-458.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2007.10.001 
53.	 Ren, C., G.M. Williams, L. Morawska, K. Mengersen, 
and S. Tong, 2008: Ozone modifies associations between 
temperature and cardiovascular mortality: Analysis of the 
NMMAPS data. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 
65, 255-260.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/oem.2007.033878 
54.	 Ren, C., G.M. Williams, K. Mengersen, L. Morawska, and 
S. Tong, 2009: Temperature enhanced effects of ozone on 
cardiovascular mortality in 95 large US communities, 1987-
2000: Assessment using the NMMAPS data. Archives of 
Environmental & Occupational Health, 64, 177-184.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/19338240903240749 
55.	 Ren, C., S. Melly, and J. Schwartz, 2010: Modifiers of 
short-term effects of ozone on mortality in eastern Massa­
chusetts-A casecrossover analysis at individual level. Environ­
mental Health, 9, Article 3.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069X-9-3 
56.	 EPA, 2015: Technical Support Document (TSD): Prepa­
ration of Emissions Inventories for the Version 6.2, 2011 
Emissions Modeling Platform. U.S. Environmental Protec­
tion Agency, Office of Air and Radiation. http://www3.epa.
gov/ttn/chief/emch/2011v6/2011v6_2_2017_2025_Emis­
Mod_TSD_aug2015.pdf
57.	 Otte, T.L., C.G. Nolte, M.J. Otte, and J.H. Bowden, 2012: 
Does nudging squelch the extremes in regional climate mod­
eling? Journal of Climate, 25, 7046-7066.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00048.1 
58.	 Gao, Y., J.S. Fu, J.B. Drake, J.-F. Lamarque, and Y. Liu, 2013: 
The impact of emission and climate change on ozone in the 
United States under representative concentration pathways 
(RCPs). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 13, 9607-9621. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/acp-13-9607-2013 
59.	 Bell, M.L. and F. Dominici, 2008: Effect modification by 
community characteristics on the short-term effects of ozone 
exposure and mortality in 98 US communities. Ameri­
can Journal of Epidemiology, 167, 986-97.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/aje/kwm396 
60.	 Sacks, J.D., L.W. Stanek, T.J. Luben, D.O. Johns, B.J. 
Buckley, J.S. Brown, and M. Ross, 2011: Particulate mat­
ter–induced health effects: Who is susceptible? Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 119, 446-454.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1002255 
61.	 EPA, 1999: Regulatory Impact Analysis - Control of Air 
Pollution from New Motor Vehicles: Tier 2 Motor Vehicle 
Emissions Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control Require­
ments. EPA420-R-99-023, 522 pp. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Transportation and Air Quali­
ty, Washington, D.C. http://www.epa.gov/tier2/documents/
r99023.pdf
62.	 EPA, 2015: Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR). U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. http://
www.epa.gov/airtransport/CSAPR/
63.	 EPA, 2015: Tier 2 Vehicle and Gasoline Sulfur Program. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Transpor­
tation and Air Quality, Washington, D.C. http://www.epa.
gov/tier2/
64.	 Dawson, J.P., P.N. Racherla, B.H. Lynn, P.J. Adams, and 
S.N. Pandis, 2009: Impacts of climate change on regional 
and urban air quality in the eastern United States: Role of 
meteorology. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 
114.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2008JD009849 
65.	 Trail, M., A.P. Tsimpidi, P. Liu, K. Tsigaridis, J. Rudokas, 
P. Miller, A. Nenes, Y. Hu, and A.G. Russell, 2014: Sensi­
tivity of air quality to potential future climate change and 
emissions in the United States and major cities. Atmospher­
ic Environment, 94, 552-563.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2014.05.079 
66.	 Delfino, R.J., S. Brummel, J. Wu, H. Stern, B. Ostro, M. 
Lipsett, A. Winer, D.H. Street, L. Zhang, T. Tjoa, and D.L. 
Gillen, 2009: The relationship of respiratory and cardiovas­
cular hospital admissions to the southern California wildfires 
of 2003. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 66, 189-
197.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/oem.2008.041376 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
91
67.	 Künzli, N., E. Avol, J. Wu, W.J. Gauderman, E. Rappaport, 
J. Millstein, J. Bennion, R. McConnell, F.D. Gilliland, K. 
Berhane, F. Lurmann, A. Winer, and J.M. Peters, 2006: 
Health effects of the 2003 southern California wildfires on 
children. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine, 174, 1221-1228.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.200604-519OC 
68.	 Park, R.J., 2003: Sources of carbonaceous aerosols over the 
United States and implications for natural visibility. Jour­
nal of Geophysical Research, 108, D12, 4355.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1029/2002JD003190 
69.	 Sapkota, A., J.M. Symons, J. Kleissl, L. Wang, M.B. Par­
lange, J. Ondov, P.N. Breysse, G.B. Diette, P.A. Eggleston, 
and T.J. Buckley, 2005: Impact of the 2002 Canadian forest 
fires on particulate matter air quality in Baltimore City. Envi­
ronmental Science & Technology, 39, 24-32.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/es035311z 
70.	 Henderson, S.B., M. Brauer, Y.C. Macnab, and S.M. Ken­
nedy, 2011: Three measures of forest fire smoke exposure 
and their associations with respiratory and cardiovascular 
health outcomes in a population-based cohort. Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 119, 1266-1271.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1002288 
71.	 Rappold, A.G., W.E. Cascio, V.J. Kilaru, S.L. Stone, L.M. 
Neas, R.B. Devlin, and D. Diaz-Sanchez, 2012: Cardio-re­
spiratory outcomes associated with exposure to wildfire 
smoke are modified by measures of community health. 
Environmental Health, 11, Article 71.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-71 
72.	 Liu, J.C., G. Pereira, S.A. Uhl, M.A. Bravo, and M.L. Bell, 
2015: A systematic review of the physical health impacts 
from non-occupational exposure to wildfire smoke. Environ­
mental Research, 136, 120-132.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2014.10.015 
73.	 Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. 
Swetnam, 2006: Warming and earlier spring increase western 
U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science, 313, 940-943.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1128834 
74.	 Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, 
G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, M. Wehner, J. Willis, D. 
Anderson, S. Doney, R. Feely, P. Hennon, V. Kharin, T. 
Knutson, F. Landerer, T. Lenton, J. Kennedy, and R. Somer­
ville, 2014: Ch. 2: Our changing climate. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 19-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0KW5CXT 
75.	 Garfin, G., G. Franco, H. Blanco, A. Comrie, P. Gonzalez, T. 
Piechota, R. Smyth, and R. Waskom, 2014: Ch. 20: South­
west. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, 
and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
Washington, D.C., 462-486.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/
J08G8HMN 
76.	 Luber, G., K. Knowlton, J. Balbus, H. Frumkin, M. Hayden, 
J. Hess, M. McGeehin, N. Sheats, L. Backer, C.B. Beard, K.L. 
Ebi, E. Maibach, R.S. Ostfeld, C. Wiedinmyer, E. Zielins­
ki-Gutiérrez, and L. Ziska, 2014: Ch. 9: Human health. Cli­
mate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National 
Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. 
Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washing­
ton, D.C., 220-256.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0PN93H5 
77.	 Westerling, A.L., M.G. Turner, E.A.H. Smithwick, W.H. 
Romme, and M.G. Ryan, 2011: Continued warming 
could transform Greater Yellowstone fire regimes by mid-
21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences, 108, 13165-13170.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1110199108 
78.	 Keywood, M., M. Kanakidou, A. Stohl, F. Dentener, G. 
Grassi, C.P. Meyer, K. Torseth, D. Edwards, A.M. Thomp­
son, U. Lohmann, and J. Burrows, 2013: Fire in the air: Bio­
mass burning impacts in a changing climate. Critical Reviews 
in Environmental Science and Technology, 43, 40-83.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2011.604248 
79.	 Spracklen, D.V., L.J. Mickley, J.A. Logan, R.C. Hudman, R. 
Yevich, M.D. Flannigan, and A.L. Westerling, 2009: Impacts 
of climate change from 2000 to 2050 on wildfire activity and 
carbonaceous aerosol concentrations in the western United 
States. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 114, 
D20301.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2008JD010966 
80.	 Seager, R., M. Ting, I. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. Vec­
chi, H.-P. Huang, N. Harnik, A. Leetmaa, N.-C. Lau, C. 
Li, J. Velez, and N. Naik, 2007: Model projections of an 
imminent transition to a more arid climate in southwest­
ern North America. Science, 316, 1181-1184.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1139601 
81.	 Reid, C.E. and J.L. Gamble, 2009: Aeroallergens, allergic 
disease, and climate change: Impacts and adaptation. Eco­
Health, 6, 458-470.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-
009-0261-x 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
92
82.	 Selgrade, M.K., R.F. Lemanske, Jr., M.I. Gilmour, L.M. 
Neas, M.D.W. Ward, P.K. Henneberger, D.N. Weissman, 
J.A. Hoppin, R.R. Dietert, P.D. Sly, A.M. Geller, P.L. 
Enright, G.S. Backus, P.A. Bromberg, D.R. Germolec, and 
K.B. Yeatts, 2006: Induction of asthma and the environment: 
What we know and need to know. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114, 615-619.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.8376 
83.	 Kinney, P.L., 2008: Climate change, air quality, and human 
health. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35, 459-
467.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.025 
84.	 Bielory, L., K. Lyons, and R. Goldberg, 2012: Climate change 
and allergic disease. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 12, 
485-494.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11882-012-0314-z 
85.	 AAAAI, Undated: Allergy Statistics. American Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org/
about-the-aaaai/newsroom/allergy-statistics.aspx
86.	 Breton, M.-C., M. Garneau, I. Fortier, F. Guay, and J. Louis, 
2006: Relationship between climate, pollen concentrations 
of Ambrosia and medical consultations for allergic rhinitis in 
Montreal, 1994–2002. Science of The Total Environment, 370, 
39-50.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.05.022 
87.	 Bartra, J., J. Mullol, A. del Cuvillo, I. Davila, M. Ferrer, I. 
Jauregui, J. Montoro, J. Sastre, and A. Valero, 2007: Air pol­
lution and allergens. Journal of Investigational Allergology and 
Clinical Immunology, 17 Suppl 2, 3-8.  http://www.jiaci.org/
issues/vol17s2/vol17s2-2.htm
88.	 Blando, J., L. Bielory, V. Nguyen, R. Diaz, and H.A. Jeng, 
2012: Anthropogenic climate change and allergic diseas­
es. Atmosphere, 3, 200-212.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
atmos3010200 
89.	 EPA, 2008: Review of the Impacts of Climate Variability 
and Change on Aeroallergens and Their Associated Effects. 
EPA/600/R-06/164F, 125 pp. U.S. Environmental Protec­
tion Agency, Washington, D.C. http://ofmpub.epa.gov/
eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=490474
90.	 Lawson, J.A. and A. Senthilselvan, 2005: Asthma epidemi­
ology: Has the crisis passed? Current Opinion in Pulmonary 
Medicine, 11, 79-84.  
91.	 Beggs, P.J., 2004: Impacts of climate change on aeroal­
lergens: Past and future. Clinical & Experimental Aller­
gy, 34, 1507-1513.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2222.2004.02061.x 
92.	 Beggs, P.J. and H.J. Bambrick, 2005: Is the global rise of 
asthma an early impact of anthropogenic climate change? 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 113, 915-919.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7724 
93.	 D’Amato, G., C.E. Baena-Cagnani, L. Cecchi, I. Annesi-Mae­
sano, C. Nunes, I. Ansotegui, M. D’Amato, G. Liccardi, M. 
Sofia, and W.G. Canonica, 2013: Climate change, air pol­
lution and extreme events leading to increasing prevalence 
of allergic respiratory diseases. Multidisciplinary Respiratory 
Medicine, 8, 1-9.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/2049-6958-8-
12 
94.	 Albertine, J.M., W.J. Manning, M. DaCosta, K.A. Stinson, 
M.L. Muilenberg, and C.A. Rogers, 2014: Projected carbon 
dioxide to increase grass pollen and allergen exposure despite 
higher ozone levels. PLoS ONE, 9, e111712.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111712 
95.	 Ziska, L., K. Knowlton, C. Rogers, D. Dalan, N. Tierney, 
M.A. Elder, W. Filley, J. Shropshire, L.B. Ford, C. Hedberg, 
P. Fleetwood, K.T. Hovanky, T. Kavanaugh, G. Fulford, 
R.F. Vrtis, J.A. Patz, J. Portnoy, F. Coates, L. Bielory, and 
D. Frenz, 2011: Recent warming by latitude associated with 
increased length of ragweed pollen season in central North 
America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 
4248-4251.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1014107108 
96.	 Rogers, C.A., P.M. Wayne, E.A. Macklin, M.L. Muilenberg, 
C.J. Wagner, P.R. Epstein, and F.A. Bazzaz, 2006: Interac­
tion of the onset of spring and elevated atmospheric CO2 
on ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia L.) pollen production. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 114, 865-869.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8549 
97.	 Singer, B.D., L.H. Ziska, D.A. Frenz, D.E. Gebhard, and 
J.G. Straka, 2005: Increasing Amb a 1 content in common 
ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia) pollen as a function of ris­
ing atmospheric CO2 concentration. Functional Plant Biolo­
gy, 32, 667-670.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/fp05039 
98.	 Neil, K. and J. Wu, 2006: Effects of urbanization on plant 
flowering phenology: A review. Urban Ecosystems, 9, 243-
257.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11252-006-9354-2 
99.	 George, K., L.H. Ziska, J.A. Bunce, and B. Quebedeaux, 
2007: Elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration and tem­
perature across an urban–rural transect. Atmospheric Envi­
ronment, 41, 7654-7665.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2007.08.018 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
93
100.	 Roetzer, T., M. Wittenzeller, H. Haeckel, and J. Nekovar, 
2000: Phenology in central Europe: Differences and trends 
of spring phenophases in urban and rural areas. Interna­
tional Journal of Biometeorology, 44, 60-66.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s004840000062 
101.	 Garcia-Mozo, H., C. Galán, V. Jato, J. Belmonte, C.D. de 
la Guardia, D. Fernández, M. Gutiérrez, M.J. Aira, J.M. 
Roure, L. Ruiz, M.M. Trigo, and E. Domínguez-Vilches, 
2006: Quercus pollen season dynamics in the Iberian pen­
insula: Response to meteorological parameters and possible 
consequences of climate change. Annals of Agricultural and 
Environmental Medicine, 13, 209-224.  http://www.uco.
es/aerobiologia/publicaciones/modelling/climate_change/
Quercus_AAEM_def.pdf
102.	 LaDeau, S.L. and J.S. Clark, 2006: Elevated CO2 and tree 
fecundity: The role of tree size, interannual variability, and 
population heterogeneity. Global Change Biology, 12, 822-
833.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01137.x 
103.	 Zhang, R., T. Duhl, M.T. Salam, J.M. House, R.C. Flagan, 
E.L. Avol, F.D. Gilliland, A. Guenther, S.H. Chung, B.K. 
Lamb, and T.M. VanReken, 2013: Development of a region­
al-scale pollen emission and transport modeling framework 
for investigating the impact of climate change on allergic 
airway disease. Biogeosciences, 10, 3977-4023.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5194/bgd-10-3977-2013 
104.	 D’Amato, G. and L. Cecchi, 2008: Effects of climate change 
on environmental factors in respiratory allergic diseases. 
Clinical & Experimental Allergy, 38, 1264-1274.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03033.x 
105.	 D’Amato, G., M. Rottem, R. Dahl, M.S. Blaiss, E. Rido­
lo, L. Cecchi, N. Rosario, C. Motala, I. Ansotegui, and I. 
Annesi-Maesano, 2011: Climate change, migration, and 
allergic respiratory diseases: An update for the allergist. 
World Allergy Organization Journal, 4, 121-125.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1097/WOX.0b013e3182260a57 
106.	 Shea, K.M., R.T. Truckner, R.W. Weber, and D.B. Peden, 
2008: Climate change and allergic disease. Journal of Aller­
gy and Clinical Immunology, 122, 443-453.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaci.2008.06.032 
107.	 D’Amato, G., L. Cecchi, M. D’Amato, and G. Liccardi, 
2010: Urban air pollution and climate change as environ­
mental risk factors of respiratory allergy: An update. Journal 
of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology, 20, 
95-102.  http://www.jiaci.org/issues/vol20issue2/1.pdf
108.	 Cecchi, L., G. D’Amato, J.G. Ayres, C. Galan, F. Forastiere, 
B. Forsberg, J. Gerritsen, C. Nunes, H. Behrendt, C. Akdis, 
R. Dahl, and I. Annesi-Maesano, 2010: Projections of the 
effects of climate change on allergic asthma: The contribu­
tion of aerobiology. Allergy, 65, 1073-1081.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1398-9995.2010.02423.x 
109.	 D’Amato, G., G. Liccardi, and G. Frenguelli, 2007: Thun­
derstorm-asthma and pollen allergy. Allergy, 62, 11-16. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1398-9995.2006.01271.x 
110.	 D’Amato, G., G. Liccardi, M. D’Amato, and M. Cazzo­
la, 2001: The role of outdoor air pollution and climatic 
changes on the rising trends in respiratory allergy. Respira­
tory Medicine, 95, 606-611.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/
rmed.2001.1112 
111.	 D’Amato, G., 2002: Environmental urban factors (air 
pollution and allergens) and the rising trends in aller­
gic respiratory diseases. Allergy, 57, 30-33.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1034/j.1398-9995.57.s72.5.x 
112.	 D’Amato, G., G. Liccardi, M. D’Amato, and S. Holgate, 
2005: Environmental risk factors and allergic bronchial asth­
ma. Clinical & Experimental Allergy, 35, 1113-1124.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.2005.02328.x 
113.	 Atkinson, R.W. and D.P. Strachan, 2004: Role of outdoor 
aeroallergens in asthma exacerbations: Epidemiological evi­
dence. Thorax, 59, 277-278.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
thx.2003.019133 
114.	 Zhong, W., L. Levin, T. Reponen, G.K. Hershey, A. Adhikari, 
R. Shukla, and G. LeMasters, 2006: Analysis of short-term 
influences of ambient aeroallergens on pediatric asthma hos­
pital visits. Science of The Total Environment, 370, 330-336. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.06.019 
115.	 Cakmak, S., R.E. Dales, and F. Coates, 2012: Does air pol­
lution increase the effect of aeroallergens on hospitalization 
for asthma? Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 129, 
228-231.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2011.09.025 
116.	 IOM, 2011: Climate Change, the Indoor Environment, 
and Health. Institute of Medicine. The National Acad­
emies Press, Washington, D.C., 286 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.17226/13115 
117.	 IOM, 1993: Indoor Allergens: Assessing and Controlling 
Adverse Health Effects. Institute of Medicine. The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 350 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.17226/2056 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
94
118.	 IOM, 2000: Clearing the Air: Asthma and Indoor Air Expo­
sures. Institute of Medicine. The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 456 pp.  http://www.nap.edu/cata­
log/9610/clearing-the-air-asthma-and-indoor-air-exposures
119.	 IOM, 2004: Damp Indoor Spaces and Health. Institute of 
Medicine. The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 370 pp.  http://dx.doi.org/10.17226/11011 
120.	 WHO, 2009: WHO Handbook on Indoor Radon: A Public 
Health Perspective. Zeeb, H. and F. Shannoun, Eds. World 
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 108 pp.  http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241547673_
eng.pdf
121.	 WHO, 2010: WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: 
Selected Pollutants. 484 pp. World Health Organization, 
Geneva. 
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0009/128169/e94535.pdf
122.	 Ott, W.R., 1989: Human activity patterns: A review of the 
literature for estimating time spent indoors, outdoors, and 
in transit. Proceedings of the Research Planning Conference on 
Human Activity Patterns. EPA National Exposure Research 
Laboratory, Las Vegas, NV, 3-1 to 3-38.  
123.	 Klepeis, N.E., W.C. Nelson, W.R. Ott, J.P. Robinson, A.M. 
Tsang, P. Switzer, J.V. Behar, S.C. Hern, and W.H. Engel­
mann, 2001: The National Human Activity Pattern Survey 
(NHAPS): A resource for assessing exposure to environmen­
tal pollutants. Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmen­
tal Epidemiology, 11, 231-252.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
sj.jea.7500165 
124.	 Riley, W.J., T.E. McKone, A.C. Lai, and W.W. Nazaroff, 
2002: Indoor particulate matter of outdoor origin: Impor­
tance of size-dependent removal mechanisms. Environ­
mental Science & Technology, 36, 200-207.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/es010723y 
125.	 Bennett, D.H. and P. Koutrakis, 2006: Determining the 
infiltration of outdoor particles in the indoor environment 
using a dynamic model. Journal of Aerosol Science, 37, 766-
785.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2005.05.020 
126.	 Wallace, L., 1996: Indoor particles: A review. Journal of the 
Air & Waste Management Association, 46, 98-126.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10473289.1996.10467451 
127.	 Brennan, T., J.B. Cummings, and J. Lstiburek, 2002: 
Unplanned airflows & moisture problems. ASHRAE journal, 
44, 44-49.  https://64.94.228.53/File Library/docLib/Pub­
lic/2002102583440_266.pdf
128.	 Stephens, B. and J.A. Siegel, 2012: Penetration of ambient 
submicron particles into single-family residences and associ­
ations with building characteristics. Indoor Air, 22, 501-513. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2012.00779.x 
129.	 Persily, A., A. Musser, and S.J. Emmerich, 2010: Mod­
eled infiltration rate distributions for U.S. housing. Indoor 
Air, 20, 473-485.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
0668.2010.00669.x 
130.	 Fisk, W.J., 2015: Review of some effects of climate change 
on indoor environmental quality and health and associ­
ated no-regrets mitigation measures. Building and Envi­
ronment, 86, 70-80.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.build­
env.2014.12.024 
131.	 Ilacqua, V., J. Dawson, M. Breen, S. Singer, and A. Berg, 
2015: Effects of climate change on residential infiltration 
and air pollution exposure. Journal of Exposure Science and 
Environmental Epidemiology, Published online 27 May 2015. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/jes.2015.38 
132.	 Weschler, C.J., 2006: Ozone’s impact on public health: Con­
tributions from indoor exposures to ozone and products of 
ozone-initiated chemistry. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
114, 1489-1496. PMC1626413 
133.	 Bell, M.L., A. Zanobetti, and F. Dominici, 2014: Who is 
more affected by ozone pollution? A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 180, 15-28. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu115 
134.	 Lin, S., X. Liu, L.H. Le, and S.-A. Hwang, 2008: Chronic 
exposure to ambient ozone and asthma hospital admissions 
among children. Environmental Health Perspectives, 116, 
1725-1730.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.11184 
135.	 Nazaroff, W.W., 2013: Exploring the consequences of climate 
change for indoor air quality. Environmental Research Letters, 
8.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/015022 
136.	 Bowers, R.M., N. Clements, J.B. Emerson, C. Wiedinmyer, 
M.P. Hannigan, and N. Fierer, 2013: Seasonal variability in 
bacterial and fungal diversity of the near-surface atmospher. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 47, 12097-12106. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es402970s 
137.	 Hardin, B.D., B.J. Kelman, and A. Saxon, 2003: Adverse 
human health effects associated with molds in the indoor envi­
ronment. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medi­
cine, 45, 470-478.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00043764-
200305000-00006 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
95
138.	 Walzer, P.D., 2013: The ecology of pneumocystis: Perspec­
tives, personal recollections, and future research opportu­
nities. The Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 60, 634-645. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jeu.12072 
139.	 Parr, A., E.A. Whitney, and R.L. Berkelman, 2014: Legio­
nellosis on the rise: A review of guidelines for prevention 
in the United States. Journal of Public Health Management 
and Practice, 21, E17-E26.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
phh.0000000000000123 
140.	 Decker, B.K. and T.N. Palmore, 2014: Hospital water and 
opportunities for infection prevention. Curr Infect Dis Rep, 
16, 432.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11908-014-0432-y 
141.	 Cunha, B.A., A. Burillo, and E. Bouza, 2015: Legionnaires’ 
disease. Lancet, Published online 28 July 2015.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60078-2 
142.	 Hines, S.A., D.J. Chappie, R.A. Lordo, B.D. Miller, R.J. 
Janke, H.A. Lindquist, K.R. Fox, H.S. Ernst, and S.C. Taft, 
2014: Assessment of relative potential for Legionella species 
or surrogates inhalation exposure from common water uses. 
Water Research, 56, 203-213.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2014.02.013 
143.	 Whiley, H., S. Giglio, and R. Bentham, 2015: Opportunis­
tic pathogens Mycobacterium Avium Complex (MAC) and 
Legionella spp. colonise model shower Pathogens, 4, 590-598. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/pathogens4030590 
144.	 Phin, N., F. Parry-Ford, T. Harrison, H.R. Stagg, N. Zhang, 
K. Kumar, O. Lortholary, A. Zumla, and I. Abubakar, 2014: 
Epidemiology and clinical management of Legionnaires’ dis­
ease. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 14, 1011-1021.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(14)70713-3 
145.	 Falkinham, J.O., III,, E.D. Hilborn, M.J. Arduino, A. Prud­
en, and M.A. Edwards, 2015: Epidemiology and ecology of 
opportunistic premise plumbing pathogens: Legionella pneu­
mophila, Mycobacterium avium, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 123, 749-758.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1408692 
146.	 Halsby, K.D., C.A. Joseph, J.V. Lee, and P. Wilkinson, 2014: 
The relationship between meteorological variables and spo­
radic cases of Legionnaires’ disease in residents of England 
and Wales. Epidemiology and Infection, 142, 2352-2359. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0950268813003294 
147.	 Cunha, B.A., J. Connolly, and E. Abruzzo, 2015: Increase 
in pre-seasonal community-acquired Legionnaire’s dis­
ease due to increased precipitation. Clinical Microbiology 
and Infection, 21, e45-e46.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cmi.2015.02.015 
148.	 Hicks, L.A., L.E. Garrison, G.E. Nelson, and L.M. Hamp­
ton, 2011: Legionellosis---United States, 2000-2009. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 1083-
1086.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6032a3.htm
149.	 Farnham, A., L. Alleyne, D. Cimini, and S. Balter, 2014: 
Legionnaires’ disease incidence and risk factors, New York, 
New York, USA, 2001-2011. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
20, 1795-1802.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2011.131872 
150.	 Johanning, E., P. Auger, P.R. Morey, C.S. Yang, and E. Olm­
sted, 2014: Review of health hazards and prevention mea­
sures for response and recovery workers and volunteers after 
natural disasters, flooding, and water damage: Mold and 
dampness. Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine, 
19, 93-99.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12199-013-0368-0 
151.	 Mudarri, D. and W.J. Fisk, 2007: Public health and econom­
ic impact of dampness and mold. Indoor Air, 17, 226-235. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2007.00474.x 
152.	 Fisk, W.J., E.A. Eliseeva, and M.J. Mendell, 2010: Associa­
tion of residential dampness and mold with respiratory tract 
infections and bronchitis: A meta-analysis. Environmental 
Health, 9, Article 72.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069x-9-72 
153.	 Seltenrich, N., 2012: Healthier tribal housing: Combining 
the best of old and new. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
120, A460-A469.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.120-a460 
154.	 Parthasarathy, S., R.L. Maddalena, M.L. Russell, and M.G. 
Apte, 2011: Effect of temperature and humidity on formal­
dehyde emissions in temporary housing units. Journal of the 
Air & Waste Management Association, 61, 689-695.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.3155/1047-3289.61.6.689 
155.	 Norbäck, D., G. Wieslander, K. Nordström, and R. 
Wålinder, 2000: Asthma symptoms in relation to measured 
building dampness in upper concrete floor construction, 
and 2-ethyl-1-hexanol in indoor air. International Journal of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 4, 1016-1025.  http://www.
nchh.org/portals/0/contents/article0877.pdf
156.	 Markowicz, P. and L. Larsson, 2015: Influence of relative 
humidity on VOC concentrations in indoor air. Envi­
ronmental Science and Pollution Research, 22, 5772-5779. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-3678-x 

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
96
157.	 Waite, T., V. Murray, and D. Baker, 2014: Carbon mon­
oxide poisoning and flooding: Changes in risk before, 
during and after flooding require appropriate public 
health interventions. Plos Currents Disasters, July 3, Edi­
tion 1.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/currents.dis.2b2eb9e­
15f9b982784938803584487f1 
158.	 Bronstein, A., J.H. Clower, S. Iqbal, F.Y. Yip, C.A. Martin, 
A. Chang, A.F. Wolkin, and J. Bell, 2011: Carbon monoxide 
exposures---United States, 2000--2009. MMWR. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 1014-1017.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6030a2.htm
159.	 Watson, D.C., M. Sargianou, A. Papa, P. Chra, I. Starakis, 
and G. Panos, 2014: Epidemiology of Hantavirus infec­
tions in humans: A comprehensive, global overview. Critical 
Reviews in Microbiology, 40, 261-272.  http://dx.doi.org/10.
3109/1040841x.2013.783555 
160.	 Jonsson, C.B., L.T.M. Figueiredo, and O. Vapalahti, 2010: 
A global perspective on hantavirus ecology, epidemiology, 
and disease. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 23, 412-441. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/cmr.00062-09 
161.	 Dearing, M.D. and L. Dizney, 2010: Ecology of hantavi­
rus in a changing world. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1195, 99-112.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2010.05452.x 
162.	 Bezirtzoglou, C., K. Dekas, and E. Charvalos, 2011: Cli­
mate changes, environment and infection: Facts, scenarios 
and growing awareness from the public health communi­
ty within Europe. Anaerobe, 17, 337-340.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.anaerobe.2011.05.016 
163.	 Klein, S.L. and C.H. Calisher, 2007: Emergence and per­
sistence of hantaviruses. Wildlife and Emerging Zoonotic 
Diseases: The Biology, Circumstances and Consequences of 
Cross-Species Transmission. Childs, J.E., J.S. Mackenzie, and 
J.A. Richt, Eds. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 217-252.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_10 
164.	 Reusken, C. and P. Heyman, 2013: Factors driving hanta­
virus emergence in Europe. Current Opinion in Virology, 3, 
92-99.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2013.01.002 
165.	 Medina-Ramón, M. and J. Schwartz, 2007: Temperature, 
temperature extremes, and mortality: A study of acclimati­
sation and effect modification in 50 US cities. Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, 64, 827-833.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/oem.2007.033175 
166.	 Akinbami, L.J., J.E. Moorman, C. Bailey, H.S. Zahran, M. 
King, C.A. Johnson, and X. Liu, 2012: Trends in Asthma 
Prevalence, Health Care Use, and Mortality in the United 
States, 2001–2010. NCHS Data Brief No. 94, May 2012, 8 
pp. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db94.pdf
167.	 Adamkiewicz, G., A.R. Zota, P. Fabian, T. Chahine, R. 
Julien, J.D. Spengler, and J.I. Levy, 2011: Moving environ­
mental justice indoors: Understanding structural influences 
on residential exposure patterns in low-income communi­
ties. American Journal of Public Health, 101, S238-S245. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300119 
168.	 Kitch, B.T., G. Chew, H.A. Burge, M.L. Muilenberg, S.T. 
Weiss, T.A. Platts-Mills, G. O’Connor, and D.R. Gold, 
2000: Socioeconomic predictors of high allergen levels in 
homes in the greater Boston area. Environmental Health Per­
spectives, 108, 301-307. PMC1638021 
169.	 Bloom, B., L.I. Jones, and G. Freeman, 2013: Summary 
Health Statistics for U.S. Children: National Health Inter­
view Survey, 2012. Vital and Health Statistics 10(258), 73 
pp. National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_258.pdf
170.	 Gelfand, E.W., 2009: Pediatric asthma: A different disease. 
Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society, 6, 278-282. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1513/pats.200808-090RM 
171.	 DellaValle, C.T., E.W. Triche, B.P. Leaderer, and M.L. Bell, 
2012: Effects of ambient pollen concentrations on frequen­
cy and severity of asthma symptoms among asthmatic chil­
dren. Epidemiology, 23, 55-63.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e31823b66b8 
172.	 Ebi, K.L. and J.A. Paulson, 2007: Climate change and chil­
dren. Pediatric Clinics of North America, 54, 213-226.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2007.01.004 
173.	 Schmier, J.K. and K.L. Ebi, 2009: The impact of cli­
mate change and aeroallergens on children’s health. Aller­
gy and Asthma Proceedings, 30, 229-237.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.2500/aap.2009.30.3229 
174.	 Moorman, J.E., L.J. Akinbami, C.M. Bailey, H.S. Zahran, 
M.E. King, C.A. Johnson, and X. Liu, 2012: National Sur­
veillance of Asthma: United States, 2001-2010. Vital and 
Health Statistics 3(35). National Center for Health Statis­
tics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_035.
pdf

3-AIR QUALITY IMPACTS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
97
175.	 Meng, Y.Y., S.H. Babey, T.A. Hastert, and E.R. Brown, 
2007: California’s racial and ethnic minorities more adversely 
affected by asthma. Policy Brief UCLA Center for Health Pol­
icy Research 1-7.  https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4k45v3xt
176.	 Brim, S.N., R.A. Rudd, R.H. Funk, and D.B. Callahan, 
2008: Asthma prevalence among US children in under­
represented minority populations: American Indian/Alaska 
Native, Chinese, Filipino, and Asian Indian. Pediatrics, 122, 
e217-e222.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-3825 
177.	 Crocker, D., C. Brown, R. Moolenaar, J. Moorman, C. Bai­
ley, D. Mannino, and F. Holguin, 2009: Racial and ethnic 
disparities in asthma medication usage and health-care utili­
zation: Data from the National Asthma Survey. Chest, 136, 
1063-1071.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1378/chest.09-0013 
178.	 Miller, J.E., 2000: The effects of race/ethnicity and income on 
early childhood asthma prevalence and health care use. Amer­
ican Journal of Public Health, 90, 428-430. Pmc1446167 
179.	 Peel, J.L., K.B. Metzger, M. Klein, W.D. Flanders, J.A. Mul­
holland, and P.E. Tolbert, 2007: Ambient air pollution and 
cardiovascular emergency department visits in potential­
ly sensitive groups. American Journal of Epidemiology, 165, 
625-633.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwk051

This page intentionally left blank
End
© Ted Soqui/Corbis 

IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS 
ON HUMAN HEALTH
4
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Lead Authors
Jesse E. Bell
Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites–North Carolina
Stephanie C. Herring
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Lesley Jantarasami*
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Contributing Authors
Carl Adrianopoli
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Kaitlin Benedict
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Kathryn Conlon
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Vanessa Escobar
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Jeremy Hess
University of Washington
Jeffrey Luvall
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Carlos Perez Garcia-Pando
Columbia University
Dale Quattrochi
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Jennifer Runkle*
Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites–North Carolina
Carl J. Schreck, III
Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites–North Carolina
Recommended Citation: Bell, J.E., S.C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, C. Adrianopoli, K. Benedict, K. Conlon, V. Escobar, J. Hess, J. Luvall, 
C.P. Garcia-Pando, D. Quattrochi, J. Runkle, and C.J. Schreck, III, 2016: Ch. 4: Impacts of Extreme Events on Human Health. 
The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, 99–128. http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0BZ63ZV
*Chapter Coordinators
Acknowledgements: Mark Keim, formerly of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Andrea Maguire*, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment

100
IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON 
HUMAN HEALTH
FPO
4
Key Findings
Increased Exposure to Extreme Events
Key Finding 1: Health impacts associated with climate-related changes in exposure to extreme events include 
death, injury, or illness; exacerbation of underlying medical conditions; and adverse effects on mental health 
[High Confidence]. Climate change will increase exposure risk in some regions of the United States due to 
projected increases in the frequency and/or intensity of drought, wildfires, and flooding related to extreme 
precipitation and hurricanes [Medium Confidence].
Disruption of Essential Infrastructure
Key Finding 2: Many types of extreme events related to climate change cause disruption of infrastructure, 
including power, water, transportation, and communication systems, that are essential to maintaining access 
to health care and emergency response services and safeguarding human health [High Confidence].
Vulnerability to Coastal Flooding
Key Finding 3: Coastal populations with greater vulnerability to health impacts from coastal flooding include 
persons with disabilities or other access and functional needs, certain populations of color, older adults, 
pregnant women and children, low-income populations, and some occupational groups [High Confidence]. 
Climate change will increase exposure risk to coastal flooding due to increases in extreme precipitation and 
in hurricane intensity and rainfall rates, as well as sea level rise and the resulting increases in storm surge 
[High Confidence].

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
101
4.1	 Introduction
Some regions of the United States have already experienced 
costly impacts—in terms of both lives lost and economic dam­
ages—from observed changes in the frequency, intensity, or 
duration of certain extreme events (Figure 1). Climate change 
projections show that there will be continuing increases in the 
occurrence and severity of some extreme events by the end 
of the century, while for other extremes the links to climate 
change are more uncertain (Table 1). (See also Ch. 1: Introduc­
tion)
Four categories of extreme events with important health 
impacts in the United States are addressed in this chapter: 1) 
flooding related to extreme precipitation, hurricanes, and coast­
al storms, 2) droughts, 3) wildfires, and 4) winter storms and 
severe thunderstorms. The health impacts of extreme heat and 
extreme cold are discussed in Chapter 2: Temperature-Related 
Death and Illness. For each event type, the chapter integrates 
discussion of populations of concern that have greater vulner­
ability to adverse health outcomes. The air quality impacts of 
wildfires are discussed below and also in Chapter 3: Air Quality 
Impacts. Although mental health effects are noted briefly here 
and in later sections of this chapter, in-depth discussion of the 
impacts of extreme events on mental health is presented in 
Chapter 8: Mental Health.
While it is intuitive that extremes can have health impacts 
such as death or injury during an event (for example, drowning 
during floods), health impacts can also occur before or after 
an extreme event as individuals may be involved in activities 
that put their health at risk, such as disaster preparation and 
post-event cleanup.1 Health risks may also arise long after the 
event, or in places outside the area where the event took place, 
as a result of damage to property, destruction of assets, loss of 
infrastructure and public services, social and economic impacts, 
environmental degradation, and other factors. Extreme events 
also pose unique health risks if multiple events occur simulta­
neously or in succession in a given location, but these issues of 
cumulative or compounding impacts are still emerging in the 
literature (see Front Matter and Ch. 1: Introduction).
Dynamic interactions between extreme events, their physical 
impacts, and population vulnerability and response can make 
it difficult to quantitatively measure all the health impacts 
that may be associated with an extreme event type, partic­
ularly those that are distributed over longer periods of time 
(See “Emerging Issues,” Section 4.8). These complexities make 
it difficult to integrate human health outcomes into climate 
impact models, and thus projections of future health burdens 
due to extreme events under climate change are not available 
Figure 1: This figure provides 10-year estimates of fatalities related to extreme events from 2004 to 2013,204 as well as estimated 
economic damages from 58 weather and climate disaster events with losses exceeding $1 billion (see Smith and Katz 2013 to 
understand how total losses were calculated).205 These statistics are indicative of the human and economic costs of extreme weather 
events over this time period. Climate change will alter the frequency, intensity, and geographic distribution of some of these extremes,2 
which has consequences for exposure to health risks from extreme events. Trends and future projections for some extremes, 
including tornadoes, lightning, and wind storms are still uncertain.
Estimated Deaths and Billion Dollar Losses from Extreme Events in the United States 2004–2013

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
102
Table 1: Health Impacts of Extreme Events
Event Type
Example Health Risks
and Impacts
(not a comprehensive list)
Observed and Projected Impacts of 
Climate Change on Extreme Events from 2014 
NCA2
Flooding Related to 
Extreme Precipitation, 
Hurricanes, Coastal 
Storms  
•	 Traumatic injury and death 
(drowning)
•	 Mental health impacts 
•	 Preterm birth and low birth weight
•	 Infrastructure disruptions and 
post-event disease spread
•	 Carbon monoxide poisoning 
related to power outages
Heavy downpours are increasing nationally, especially over 
the last three to five decades, with the largest increases in 
the Midwest and Northeast. Increases in the frequency and 
intensity of extreme precipitation events are projected for all 
U.S. regions. [High Confidence].
The intensity, frequency, and duration of North Atlantic 
hurricanes, as well as the frequency of the strongest 
hurricanes, have all increased since the 1980s [High 
Confidence]. Hurricane intensity and rainfall are projected 
to increase as the climate continues to warm [Medium 
Confidence].
Increasing severity and frequency of flooding have been 
observed throughout much of the Mississippi and Missouri 
River Basins. Increased flood frequency and severity 
are projected in the Northeast and Midwest regions [Low 
Confidence]. In the Western United States, increasing 
snowmelt and rain-on-snow events (increased runoff when 
rain falls onto existing snowpack) will increase flooding in 
some mountain watersheds [Medium Confidence].
In the next several decades, storm surges and high tides 
could combine with sea level rise and land subsidence to 
further increase coastal flooding in many regions. The U.S. 
East and Gulf Coasts, Hawaii, and the U.S.-affiliated Pacific 
Islands are particularly at risk. 
Droughts
•	 Reduced water quality and 
quantity
•	 Respiratory impacts related to 
reduced air quality
•	 Mental health impacts
Over the last several decades, drought patterns and trends 
have been changing, but patterns vary regionally across the 
United States. Droughts in the Southwest are projected to 
become more intense [High Confidence].
Wildfires
•	 Smoke inhalation
•	 Burns and other traumatic injury 
•	 Asthma exacerbations 
•	 Mental health impacts 
Increased warming, drought, and insect outbreaks, all 
caused by or linked to climate change, have increased 
wildfires and impacts to people and ecosystems in the 
Southwest [High Confidence]. 
Rising temperatures and hotter, drier summers are projected 
to increase the frequency and intensity of large wildfires, 
particularly in the western United States and Alaska. 
Winter Storms & 
Severe Thunderstorms 
•	 Traumatic injury and death
•	 Carbon monoxide poisoning 
related to power outages
•	 Hypothermia and frostbite 
•	 Mental health impacts
Winter storms have increased in frequency and intensity 
since the 1950s, and their tracks have shifted northward 
[Medium Confidence]. Future trends in severe storms, 
including the intensity and frequency of tornadoes, hail, and 
damaging thunderstorm winds, are uncertain and are being 
studied intensively [Low Confidence]. 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
103
in the literature. Instead, this chapter focuses on explaining the 
physical processes and pathways that scientists know contribute 
to human exposure and identifying overarching conclusions re­
garding the risk of adverse health impacts as a result of chang­
ing extreme weather and climate.
4.2	 Complex Factors Determine Health Impacts 
The severity and extent of health effects associated with ex­
treme events depend on the physical impacts of the extreme 
events themselves as well as the unique human, societal, and 
environmental circumstances at the time and place where 
events occur. This complex set of factors can moderate or 
exacerbate health outcomes and vulnerability in the affected 
people and communities (Figure 2). Vulnerability is the ten­
dency or predisposition to be adversely affected by climate-re­
lated health effects. It encompasses three elements—expo­
sure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity—that also interact 
with and are influenced by the social determinants of health 
(See Ch. 1: Introduction and Ch. 9: Populations of Concern for 
additional discussion and definitions of these terms.) 
Exposure is contact between a person and one or more bio­
logical, psychosocial, chemical, or physical stressors, including 
stressors affected by climate change. Contact may occur in a 
single instance or repeatedly over time, and may occur in one 
location or over a wider geographic area. Demographic shifts 
and population migration may change exposure to public 
health impacts. For example, since 1970, coastal population 
growth (39%) has substantially increased compared to popula­
tion growth for the United States as a whole (about 13%).3 In 
the future, this coastal migration in conjunction with rising sea 
levels has the potential to result in increased vulnerability to 
storm surge events for a greater proportion of the U.S. popu­
lation concentrated in these coastal areas. Choices by individ­
uals and governments can reduce or increase some exposure 
risk to extreme events.4 As shown in Figure 2, such choices 
can include whether to build or allow development in flood­
plains and coastal areas subject to extreme high tides and 
sea level rise. Individuals’ responses to evacuation orders and 
other emergency warnings also affect their exposure to health 
threats. Factors such as income have been linked to how peo­
ple perceive the risks to which they are exposed and choose 
Figure 2: This conceptual diagram for a flooding event illustrates the key pathways by which humans are exposed to health threats 
from climate drivers, and potential resulting health outcomes (center boxes). These exposure pathways exist within the context of 
other factors that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that influence health outcomes and 
vulnerability for individuals are shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. Key factors 
that influence health outcomes and vulnerability at larger community or societal scales, such as natural and built environments, 
governance and management, and institutions, are shown in the left box. All of these influencing factors may also be affected by 
climate change. See Chapter 1: Introduction for more information.
Climate Change and Health—Flooding

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
104
to respond, as well as their ability to evacuate or relocate to 
a less risk-prone location.5 The condition of the built environ­
ment also affects exposure to extreme events, and those living 
in low-quality, poorly maintained, or high-density housing may 
have greater risks of health impacts.6 
Sensitivity is the degree to which people or communities are 
affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate variability 
and change. It is determined, at least in part, by biologically 
based traits such as age. For example, older adults (generally 
defined as age 65 and older) are physiologically more sensitive 
to health impacts from extreme events because of normal 
aging processes; they are generally more frail, more likely to 
have chronic medical conditions that make them more depen­
dent on medications, and require more assistance in activities 
of daily living.7, 8 In addition, social determinants of health 
affect disparities in the prevalence of medical conditions that 
contribute to biological sensitivity.9, 10 Health disparities are 
more prevalent in low-income populations, as well as in some 
communities of color, and are frequently exacerbated during 
extreme events.11 For example, Black or African American 
populations have higher rates of chronic conditions such as 
asthma, decreased lung function, and cardiovascular issues, all 
of which are known to increase sensitivity to health effects of 
smoke from wildfires  (Ch. 3: Air Quality Impacts).12
Adaptive capacity is the ability of communities, institutions, 
or people to adjust to potential hazards, to take advantage of 
opportunities, or to respond to 
consequences. Having strong 
adaptive capacity contributes to 
resilience—the ability to prepare 
and plan for, absorb, recover 
from, and more successfully 
adapt to adverse events.13 In 
the context of extreme events, 
people with low adaptive capac­
ity have difficulty responding, evacuating, or relocating when 
necessary, and recovering from event-related health impacts. 
For individuals, health outcomes are strongly influenced by the 
social determinants of health that affect a person’s adaptive 
capacity. Poverty is a key risk factor, and the poor are dispropor­
tionately affected by extreme events.4, 9, 14 Low-income individ­
uals may have fewer financial resources and social capital (such 
as human networks and relationships) to help them prepare for, 
respond to, and recover from an extreme event.15, 16 In many 
urban, low-income neighborhoods, adaptive capacity is reduced 
where physical and social constructs, such as community infra­
structure, neighborhood cohesion, and social patterns, promote 
social isolation.17, 18, 19 Those with higher income possess a much 
higher level of resilience and availability of resources to increase 
their adaptive capacity.20, 21 Other attributes of individuals that 
contribute to lower adaptive capacity include their age (very 
young or very old) and associated dependency on caregivers, 
disabilities such as mobility or cognitive impairments, having 
specific access and functional needs, medical or chemical de­
pendence, limited English proficiency, social or cultural isola­
tion, homelessness, and institutionalization (prisons, psychiatric 
facilities, nursing homes).1, 8, 22 
At a larger community or societal level, adaptive capacity is 
heavily influenced by governance, management, and institu­
tions.23 Governments and non-governmental organizations 
provide essential extreme-event preparedness, coordination, 
emergency response, and recovery functions that increase 
adaptive capacity at the local, state, tribal, and federal levels—
for example, in providing early warning systems where possi­
ble, evacuation assistance, and disaster relief.13, 24 Risk sharing, 
management, and recovery schemes such as insurance can 
also play a significant role in 
building resilience in the context 
of extreme events and climate 
change.25, 26 For instance, lack of 
health insurance has been asso­
ciated with greater risk of hospi­
tal admission after exposure to 
certain weather events.27 Public 
health actions or interventions 
that maintain or strengthen the adaptive capacity of com­
munities, institutions, or people could help mediate certain 
health impacts due to extreme events.28 On the other hand, 
climate change—particularly its effect on extreme events—has 
the potential to create unanticipated public health stressors 
that could overwhelm the U.S. public health system’s adaptive 
capacity and could require new approaches.28 
4.3	 Disruption of Essential Infrastructure
When essential infrastructure and related services are disrupt­
ed during and after an extreme event, a population’s exposure 
to health hazards can increase, and losses related to the event 
can reduce adaptive capacity.4 Disruptions can include reduced 
functionality, such as poor road conditions that limit travel, or 
complete loss of infrastructure, such as roads and bridges being 
washed away. Serious health risks can arise from infrastructure 
and housing damage and disruption or loss of access to electric­
ity, sanitation, safe food and water supplies, health care, com­
Family affected by Hurricane Sandy prepares to take shelter in 
Morristown, New Jersey,  October 31, 2012. 
Having strong adaptive capacity contributes 
to resilience—the ability to prepare and plan 
for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully 
adapt to adverse events.

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
105
munication, and transportation.1, 29, 30, 31, 32 Identifying vulnerable 
infrastructure and investing in strategies to reduce vulnerability, 
including redundancy (having additional or alternate systems in 
place as backup) and ensuring a certain standard of condition 
and performance can reduce the likelihood of significant ad­
verse impacts to infrastructure from extreme weather events.33
Health Risks Related to Infrastructure
Existing infrastructure is generally designed to perform at its 
engineered capacity assuming historical weather patterns, and 
these systems could be more vulnerable to failure in response 
to weather-related stressors under future climate scenarios.4, 
34, 35 Shifts in the frequency or intensity of extreme events out­
side their historical range pose infrastructure risks, which may 
be compounded by the fact that much of the existing critical 
infrastructure in the United States, like water and sewage sys­
tems, roads, bridges, and power plants, are aging and in need 
of repair or replacement.4, 36 For example, the 2013 American 
Society of Civil Engineer’s Report Card assigned a letter grade 
of D+ to the condition and performance of the Nation’s infra­
structure.37 
In addition, recurrent weather-related stressors, such as “nui­
sance flooding” (frequent coastal flooding that is increasing in 
frequency due to sea level rise), contribute to overall dete­
rioration of infrastructure like stormwater drainage systems 
and roads (see Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness).38 These systems 
are important in the context of health because drainage helps 
to avoid sewage overflows and maintain water quality,39 and 
roads are vital for evacuations and emergency response during 
and after extreme events.40 
Energy infrastructure that relies on environmental inputs, such 
as water for cooling in power generation or for hydroelectric 
dams, is also vulnerable to changes in extreme events due 
to climate change.34, 41 Power generation accounts for one of 
the largest withdrawals of freshwater in the United States.42 
Longer or more intense droughts that are projected for some 
regions of the United States (see Table 1) will contribute to 
reduced energy production in those regions, which may lead 
to supply interruptions of varying lengths and magnitudes 
and adverse impacts to other infrastructure that depends on 
energy supply.34 
Power Outages
Electricity is fundamental to much modern infrastructure, 
and power outages are commonly associated with the types 
of extreme events highlighted in this chapter.43 During power 
outages, observed health impacts include increased deaths 
from accidental and natural causes,44 increased cases of food­
borne diarrheal illness from consuming food spoiled by lack 
of refrigeration (see Ch. 7: Food Safety),1 and increased rates 
of hospitalization.45 In addition, extreme-event-related power 
outages are associated with increased injuries and deaths 
from carbon monoxide poisoning after floods, hurricanes, 
severe winter storms, and ice storms.1, 31, 46, 47, 48, 49 This is due to 
increased use of gasoline-powered generators, charcoal grills, 
and kerosene and propane heaters or stoves inside the home 
or other areas without proper ventilation (see also Ch. 3: Air 
Quality Impacts). Populations considered especially vulnerable 
to the health impacts of power outages include older adults, 
young children, those reliant on electrically powered medical 
equipment like ventilators and oxygen, those with preexisting 
health conditions, and those with disabilities (see Ch. 9: Pop­
ulations of Concern).1, 43, 44 In rural communities, power and 
communications can take longer to restore after damage from 
an extreme event.50
Transportation, Communication, and Access 
Damage to transportation infrastructure or difficult road 
conditions may delay first responders, potentially delaying 
treatment of acute injuries and requiring more serious inter­
vention or hospitalization.40 Extreme events can disrupt access 
to health care services via damage to or loss of transportation 
infrastructure, evacuation, and population displacement.32 
For chronically ill people, treatment interruptions and lack of 
access to medication can exacerbate health conditions both 
during and after the extreme event.1, 51 Surveys of patients 
after Hurricane Katrina showed that those with cancer, hy­
pertension, kidney disease requiring dialysis, cardiovascular 
disease, and respiratory illnesses were particularly affected.51, 
52, 53 Evacuations also pose health risks to older adults—espe­
cially those who are frail, medically incapacitated, or residing 
in nursing or assisted living facilities—and may be complicated 
by the need for concurrent transfer of medical records, med­
ications, and medical equipment.1, 54 Some individuals with 
disabilities may also be disproportionally affected during evac­
uations if they are unable to access evacuation routes, have 
difficulty in understanding or receiving warnings of impending 
danger, or have limited ability to communicate their needs.55 
Power lines damaged by Hurricane Isaac's wind and surge in 
Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, September 3, 2012.

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
106
In addition, persons with limited English proficiency are less 
likely to understand or have timely access to emergency 
information, which may lead to delayed evacuation.56, 57 Health 
risks increase if evacuation is delayed until after a storm hits; 
loss of power and damage to communications and transporta­
tion infrastructure can hinder health system operations.1 
Water Infrastructure
Extreme precipitation events and storms can overwhelm or 
damage stormwater and wastewater treatment infrastructure, 
increasing the risk of exposure to contaminated water (see Ch. 
6: Water-Related Illness). Risk of post-flood gastrointestinal ill­
ness outbreaks are considered to be low in the United States, 
but risk increases for displaced populations—especially young 
children and infants with immature immune systems—where 
shelter conditions are crowded or have poor sanitation.1, 29 
There is potential for post-flood mold and fungi growth inside 
houses to worsen allergic and asthmatic symptoms, but these 
types of health impacts have not been documented following 
floods or storms.1, 29, 58, 59 In general, however, adverse health 
effects from dampness and mold in homes are well known and 
studied.60, 61, 62
Cascading Failures
Many infrastructure systems are reliant on one another, 
and disruption or failure of one system or at any place in 
the system can lead to the disruption of interconnected 
systems—a phenomenon referred to as a cascading failure. 
For example, electricity is essential to multiple systems, and 
a failure in the electrical grid can have cascading effects on 
water and sewage treatment, transportation, and health care 
systems.36, 43 Extreme events can simultaneously strain single 
or multiple components of interconnected infrastructure and 
related facilities and equipment, which increases the risk of 
cascading infrastructure failure.63, 64 This risk to interconnected 
systems has been particularly notable in the context of urban 
areas (especially cities for which the design or maintenance 
of critical infrastructure needs improvement) and industrial 
sites containing chemicals or hazardous materials that rely 
on specific equipment—such as holding tanks, pipelines, and 
electricity-dependent safety mechanisms like automatic shut-
off valves—to prevent releases.4, 65, 66 Dramatic infrastructure 
system failures are rare, but such cascading failures can lead 
to public health consequences when they do occur, including 
shifts in disease incidence.67 
The 2003 blackout in the northeastern United States, caused 
indirectly by surging electrical demand during a heat wave, is 
an illustrative example of how climate change could introduce 
or exacerbate health threats from cascading infrastructure 
failures related to extreme weather. During this 31-hour event, 
lack of electricity compromised traffic control, health care and 
emergency services, wastewater treatment, solid waste col­
lection, and a host of other critical infrastructure operations.68, 
69, 70, 71 New York City health officials responded to failure of 
hospital emergency generators and interruptions in electrically 
powered medical equipment, contamination of recreational 
water and beaches with untreated sewage, pest control issues, 
and loss of refrigeration leading to potential impacts on food 
and vaccine spoilage.72 Increased incidence of gastrointestinal 
illness from contaminated food or water, and a large increase 
in accidental and non-accidental deaths and hospitalizations 
in New York City were attributed to the blackout.44, 45, 72 See 
Chapter 6: Water-Related Illness for other examples of health 
impacts when interconnected wastewater, stormwater, and 
drinking water infrastructure fails, such as during the 1993 
Milwaukee Cryptosporidium outbreak. 
4.4	 Flooding Related to Extreme Precipitation,
Hurricanes, and Coastal Storms
Floods are the primary health hazard associated with extreme 
precipitation events, hurricanes, and coastal storms. Risk of 
exposure to floods varies by region in the United States and 
by type of flooding that occurs in that location (see Table 1 
and “Flood Terminology”). People in flood-prone regions are 
expected to be at greater risk of exposure to flood hazards due 
to climate change (Table 1),9, 73, 74 which may result in various 
types of health impacts described below.
Most flood deaths in the United States are due to drowning 
associated with flash flooding.1, 29, 58 The majority of these 
deaths are associated with becoming stranded or swept away 
when driving or walking near or through floodwaters.58, 76, 77, 
78 Flash floods in the United States occurred more frequently 
from 2006 to 2012 and were associated with more deaths and 
injuries in rural areas compared to urban areas.78 Contributing 
factors include the following: 1) small, rural basins develop 
flash flood conditions much more quickly, providing less time 
to notify rural residents with emergency procedures like 
Coastal floods – predominately caused by storm 
surges that are exacerbated by sea level rise. Coastal 
floods can destroy buildings and infrastructure, 
cause severe coastal erosion, and submerge large 
areas of the coast. 
Flash and urban floods – occur in smaller inland 
natural or urban watersheds and are closely tied to 
heavy rainfall. Flash floods develop within minutes or 
hours after a rainfall event, and can result in severe 
damage and loss of life due to high water velocity, 
heavy debris load, and limited warning.
River floods – occur in large watersheds like the 
Mississippi and Missouri River Basins. River floods 
depend on many factors including precipitation, 
preexisting soil moisture conditions, river basin 
topography, and human factors like land-use change 
and flood control infrastructure (dams, levees). 
Adapted from Georgakakos et al. (2014).75
Flood Terminology

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
107
warnings, road closures, and evacuations; 2) more rural roads 
intersect low-water crossings without bridge infrastructure 
and rural areas have fewer alternative transportation options 
when roads are closed; and 3) rural areas have fewer emer­
gency response units and slower response times.78 Although 
flash floods are less frequent in urban areas, a single urban 
event is likely to result in more deaths and injuries than a rural 
event.78 
Drowning in floodwaters was the leading cause of death 
(estimated 2,544 persons) among people  directly exposed 
to hazards associated with hurricanes and coastal storms 
from 1963 to 2012.79 Hurricanes are typically associated with 
coastal flooding, but they can also cause substantial inland 
flooding before, during, and after landfall, even when far from 
the storm’s center (Figure 3).80, 81, 82 
The deadliest U.S. storms of this century to date were Hur­
ricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy. Katrina was a very 
large and powerful Category 3 storm that hit the Gulf Coast 
region in 2005. Hurricane Katrina was responsible for almost 
half of the hurricane-related deaths over the past 50 years,79 
with the majority of deaths directly related to the storm in 
Louisiana (an estimated 971 to 1,300 deaths) due to drown­
ing or flood-related physical trauma due to the failure of the 
levees in New Orleans.83, 84 Sandy was a historically rare storm 
that affected a large portion of the country in October 2012, 
with particularly significant human health and infrastructure 
impacts in New Jersey and the greater New York City area. Su­
perstorm Sandy is estimated to have caused between 117 and 
147 direct deaths across the Atlantic basin, also with drown­
ing and flood-related physical trauma as the leading cause of 
death.85, 86
Both fatal and non-fatal flood-related injuries can occur in any 
phase of the event: before (preparation or evacuation), during, 
and after (cleanup and recovery). Common flood-related inju­
ries include blunt trauma from falling debris or objects moving 
quickly in floodwater, electrocution, falls, and motor vehicle 
accidents from wet, damaged, or obstructed roads.1, 29, 58 Other 
common, generally non-fatal injuries include cuts, puncture 
wounds, sprains/strains, burns, hypothermia, and animal bites.1, 
29, 58 Exposure to floodwaters or to contaminated drinking water 
can cause gastrointestinal illness; wound infections; skin irrita­
tions and infections; and eye, ear, nose, and throat infections.1, 
29 Many of these injuries have been observed in occupational 
settings 31 and in rural areas.78 
In the United States, populations with greater vulnerability to 
flood-related injuries and illnesses include older adults, the 
immunocompromised and others with existing illness (es­
pecially if dependent on routine medical treatments or drug 
prescriptions), certain racial/ethnic groups (Black and Hispanic 
or Latino), people with limited English proficiency, and peo­
ple with lower socioeconomic status (especially if uninsured, 
unemployed, or living in poor-quality housing).1, 73 Differences in 
Figure 3: Composite map of floods associated with landfalling 
hurricanes over the past 31 years, based on stream gauge data. 
The Flood Ratio (Q) refers to maximum hurricane-related flood 
peaks compared to 10-year flood peaks (expected to occur, 
on average, once every 10 years and corresponds to the 90th 
percentile of the flood peak distribution) calculated for the same 
area. See Villarini et al. 2014 for a detailed description of how Q 
values are calculated.80 
Q values between 0.6 and 1 (light blue and yellow) generally 
indicate minor to moderate flooding, while values above 1 
(orange and red) generally indicate major flooding larger than the 
10-year flood peak. The dark gray areas of the map represent 
the extent of the 500-km buffer around the center of circulation 
of the hurricanes included during the study period (the light gray 
areas of the map fall outside of the study area). 
Figure 3 shows that hurricanes are important contributors to 
flooding in the eastern United States, as well as large areas of 
the central United States. Land use/land cover properties and 
soil moisture conditions are also important factors for flooding. 
(Figure source: adapted from Villarini et al. 2014)80
Hurricane-Induced Flood Effects
in Eastern and Central United States
A truck gets stuck in the storm surge covering Highway 90 in 
Gulfport, Mississippi, during Hurricane Isaac, August 29, 2012.

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
108
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity lead to a dispropor­
tionate number of flood-related fatalities among older adults, 
males, and some low-income communities of color.29 For exam­
ple, almost half of deaths from Hurricane Katrina were people 
over age 75, while for Superstorm Sandy almost half were over 
age 65.1, 29 The Black adult mortality rate from Hurricane Katrina 
was 1.7 to 4 times higher than that of whites.29, 84 Floods and 
storms also create numerous occupational health risks, with 
most storm-related fatalities associated with cleanup activities 
(44%), construction (26%), public utilities restoration (8%), and 
security/policing (6%).1 First responders and other emergency 
workers face greater health and safety risks when working in 
conditions with infrastructure disruptions, communication 
interruptions, and social unrest or violence following floods and 
storms.73, 87, 88
Pregnant women and newborns are uniquely vulnerable to 
flood health hazards. Flood exposure was associated with 
adverse birth outcomes (preterm birth, low birth weight) after 
Hurricane Katrina and the 1997 floods in North Dakota.89, 90 
Floods and storms can also create conditions in which chil­
dren can become separated from their parents or caregivers, 
which—particularly for children with disabilities or special 
health care needs—increases their vulnerability to a range of 
health threats, including death, injury, disease, psychological 
trauma, and abuse.91, 92, 93 Flood-related mental health impacts 
are associated with direct and longer-term losses, social im­
pacts, stress, and economic hardship.1, 29, 58 Women, children, 
older adults, low-income populations, and those in poor 
health, with prior mental health issues, or with weak social 
networks may be especially vulnerable to the mental health 
impacts of floods (Ch. 8: Mental Health).
4.5	 Droughts 
Drought may be linked to a broad set of health hazards, 
including wildfires, dust storms, extreme heat events, flash 
flooding, degraded air and water quality, and reduced water 
quantity.74 Exposure risk to potential drought health hazards 
is expected to vary widely across the nation, depending on 
several localized variables, such as characteristics of the built 
environment, loss of livelihoods, local demand for water, and 
changes in ecosystems.94, 95 Researching the health effects of 
drought poses unique challenges given multiple definitions 
of the beginning and end of a drought, and because health 
effects tend to accumulate over time. In addition, health im­
pacts do not occur in isolation. For example, droughts intensify 
heat waves by reducing evaporative cooling,2 further compli­
cating efforts to attribute specific health outcomes to specific 
drought conditions.
A primary health implication of drought arises from the 
contamination and depletion of water sources,95 but there 
are few studies documenting specific health consequences 
in the United States.96 Drought in coastal areas can increase 
saltwater intrusion (the movement of ocean water into fresh 
groundwater), reducing the supply and quality of potable wa­
ter.97, 98, 99 In addition to reducing water quantity, drought can 
decrease water quality when low flow or stagnant conditions 
increase concentrations of pollutants or contaminants (such as 
chemicals and heavy metals) and when higher temperatures 
encourage pathogen growth.95, 96, 100, 101, 102, 103 Heavy rain follow­
ing drought can flush accumulated pathogens or contaminants 
into water bodies.104, 105 Reduced surface and groundwater 
quality can increase risk of water-related illness as well as 
foodborne illness if pathogens or contaminants enter the food 
chain (see Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness and Ch. 7: Food Safety).
In some regions of the United States, drought has been associ­
ated with increased incidence of West Nile virus disease.106, 107, 
108, 109, 110 Human exposure risk to West Nile virus may increase 
during drought conditions due to a higher prevalence of the 
virus in mosquito and bird populations as a result of closer 
contact between birds (virus hosts) and mosquitoes (vectors) 
as they congregate around remaining water sources (see Ch. 
5: Vector-Borne Diseases) .111 Primarily in the Southwest, 
droughts followed by periods of heavy rainfall have been 
associated with an increase in rodent populations.112, 113, 114 
This could lead to increased exposures to rodent allergens and 
rodent-borne diseases, such as hantavirus.115, 116, 117 
Farmer in drought-stressed peanut field in Georgia. Health 
implications of drought include contamination and depletion of 
water sources.

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
109
Fungi growth and dispersal are sensitive to changes in temperature, moisture, and wind.136 Illnesses or allergic 
reactions related to fungal toxins and superficial or invasive fungal infections can cause serious illness, permanent 
disability, or death. People generally become infected by breathing in fungal spores directly from the environment 
or having spores enter the skin at sites of injury. Coccidioidomycosis, also called “Valley Fever,” is an infection 
caused by Coccidioides, a fungus found mainly in the southwestern United States. Reports of these infections 
are on the rise.137 The fungus appears to grow best in soil after heavy rainfall and then becomes airborne most 
effectively during hot, dry conditions.138 Several studies in Arizona and California, where most reported cases in 
the United States occur, suggest that climate likely plays a role in seasonal and yearly infection patterns.139, 140 
Recently, Coccidioides was found in soil in south-central Washington, far north of where it was previously known 
to exist.141 Climate factors such as drought and increased temperature may be contributing to Coccidioides’ 
expanded geographic range.142 Thus, more prolonged or intense droughts resulting from climate change could lead 
to improved conditions for the spread of Coccidioides.143 Understanding the impact of climate change on fungal 
infections (such as Coccidioidomycosis, Crypotcoccos gattii, and Mucormycosis) would require comprehensive 
epidemiologic surveillance, better methods to detect disease-causing fungi in the environment, and ongoing 
multidisciplinary collaboration. 
Fungal Diseases and Climate Change 
FPO
Drought may increase the potential for 
wind erosion to cause soil dust to become 
airborne, and there is evidence from past 
trends showing regional increases in dust 
activity due to drought cycles, but there is 
large uncertainty about future projections 
of climate impacts on frequency or 
intensity of dust storms.119, 128, 129 Wind 
erosion can also be exacerbated by 
human activities that disturb the soil, 
including growing crops, livestock grazing, 
recreation and suburbanization, and 
water diversion for irrigation.119, 128, 130 
Major dust activity in the United States is 
centered in the Southwest, where sources 
are mostly natural, and the Great Plains, 
extending from Montana to southern Texas, where sources are mainly from human activities associated with land 
use, such as agriculture.131 These are also regions where climate change is expected to affect drought patterns.2 
In the United States, dust exposure has been linked to increased incidence in respiratory disease, including 
asthma, acute bronchitis, and pneumonia.27, 132, 133 However, the dust characteristics (such as composition and 
particle size), exposure levels, and biological mechanisms responsible for the observed health effects of dust are not 
completely understood. In part, this is because observations are generally unavailable in areas where dust exposure 
is greatest, including drylands and agricultural areas.122 Apart from illness, intense dust storms are also associated 
with impaired visibility, which can cause road traffic accidents resulting in injury and death.134, 135
Wind Erosion and Dust Storms
April 14, 2013. Dust storm on Interstate Highway 10 California USA.
"In the United States, dust exposure has been linked to increased incidence in 
respiratory disease, including asthma, acute bronchitis, and pneumonia."

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
110
Drought conditions also tend to reduce air quality and exacer­
bate respiratory illness by way of several mechanisms associ­
ated with soil drying, loss of vegetation, airborne particulate 
matter, and the creation of conditions conducive for dust 
storms and wildfires.118, 119 In addition, air pollutants such as 
soluble trace gases and particles remain suspended in the air 
when there is a lack of precipitation (see Ch. 3: Air Quality 
Impacts).120 Inhalation of particles can irritate bronchial pas­
sages and lungs, resulting in exacerbated chronic respiratory 
illnesses.95 The size of particles is directly linked to their poten­
tial health effects. Exposure to fine particles is associated with 
cardiovascular illness (for example, heart attacks and strokes) 
and premature death, and is likely associated with adverse 
respiratory effects.121 There is greater uncertainty regarding 
the health effects of inhaling coarse particles (often found in 
soil dust), but some evidence indicates an association with 
premature death and cardiovascular and respiratory effects.121, 
122, 123
Mental health issues have also been observed during drought 
periods through research primarily conducted in Australia 
(see also Ch. 8: Mental Health).94 Rural areas, in particular, can 
experience a rise in mental health issues related to economic 
insecurity from drought.94, 124, 125, 126, 127
4.6	 Wildfires
Climate change is projected to increase the frequency and 
intensity of large wildfires (Figure 4), with associated health 
risks projected to increase in many regions.74, 144 Wildfire can 
have health impacts well beyond the perimeter of the fire. 
Populations near the fire or even thousands of miles down­
wind may be exposed to a complex smoke mixture containing 
various substances including carbon monoxide, ozone, toxic 
chemicals, and both fine and coarse particles,145, 146 presenting 
a serious health risk for the exposed populations (see Ch. 3: 
Air Quality Impacts).147, 148 For example, the 2002 forest fires 
in Quebec resulted in up to a 30-fold increase in airborne fine 
particulate concentrations in Baltimore, Maryland, a city near­
ly 1,000 miles downwind.74 Exposure times can range from a 
few days to several weeks.145, 149, 150 
Exposure to smoke-related air pollutants from wildfires has 
been associated with a wide range of human health effects, 
including early deaths and low infant birth weight, with the 
strongest evidence for acute respiratory illness.145, 146, 151, 152, 153, 
154, 155 Inhalation of smoke from wildfire has been linked to ex­
acerbated respiratory problems, such as shortness of breath, 
asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).154, 
156, 157, 158 While the association between smoke exposure and 
cardiovascular outcomes is uncertain,154 exposure to fine par­
ticles contributes to risk of cardiovascular disease and prema­
ture death.159, 160, 161, 162 
Wildfires can also affect indoor air quality for those living near 
affected areas by increasing particulate matter concentrations 
within homes, leading to many of the adverse health impacts 
already discussed.149, 163 For example, during the 2007 San 
Diego wildfires, health monitoring showed excess emergency 
room visits for asthma, respiratory problems, chest pain, and 
COPD. During times of peak fire particulate matter concentra­
tions, the odds of a person seeking emergency care increased 
by 50% when compared to non-fire conditions.164 Smoke from 
wildfires can also impair driving visibility, increasing risks of 
motor vehicle deaths and injuries.134, 165, 166, 167 
Exposure to smoke-related air pollutants from wildfires has 
been associated with a wide range of human health effects.
Figure 4: Based on 17 climate model simulations for the 
continental United States using a higher emissions pathway 
(RCP8.5), the map shows projected percentage increases in 
weeks with risk of very large fires by mid-century (2041–2070) 
compared to the recent past (1971–2000). The darkest shades 
of red indicated that up to a 6-fold increase in risk is projected for 
parts of the West. This area includes the Great Basin, Northern 
Rockies, and parts of Northern California. Gray represents areas 
within the continental United States where there is either no data 
or insufficient historical observations on very large fires to build 
robust models. The potential for very large fire events is also 
expected to increase along the southern coastline and in areas 
around the Great Lakes. (Figure source: adapted from Barbero 
et al. 2015 by NOAA)206
Projected Increases in Very Large Fires

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
111
Pregnant women, children, and the elderly are more sensitive 
to the harmful health effects of wildfire smoke exposure (see 
also Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).12, 156, 168, 169 Firefighters are 
exposed to significantly higher levels and longer periods of 
exposure to combustion products from fires, leading to health 
risks that include decreased lung function, inflammation, and 
respiratory system problems, as well as injuries from burns 
and falling trees.145, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173
Wildfires can also create an increased burden on the health 
care system and public health infrastructure. For example, 
wildfires near populated areas often necessitate large evacu­
ations, requiring extensive public health resources, including 
shelter, and treatment of individuals for injuries, smoke inha­
lation, and mental health impacts.67, 166, 174, 175 Housing devel­
opment in or near the wildland–urban interface has expanded 
over the last several decades and is expected to continue to 
expand.176 These changing development patterns in combina­
tion with a changing climate are increasing the vulnerability of 
these areas to wildfires.177, 178, 179 
Following wildfire, increased soil erosion rates and changes 
to runoff generation may contaminate water-supply reser­
voirs and disrupt downstream drinking water supplies.180, 181 
Post-wildfire erosion and runoff has been linked to increased 
flooding and debris flow hazards, depending on the severity 
of the fire, seasonal rainfall patterns, watershed characteris­
tics, and the size of the burn area.182, 183, 184, 185 Wildfires have a 
range of short- and long-term effects on watersheds that have 
the potential to change water quality, quantity, availability, 
and treatability downstream from the burned area.186, 187, 188
4.7	 Winter Storms and Severe Thunderstorms
The primary health hazards of severe thunderstorms are from 
lightning and high winds, while the principal winter storm haz­
ards include extreme cold temperatures (see Ch. 2: Tempera­
ture-related Deaths and Illness), frozen precipitation, and as­
sociated dangerous road and other conditions. Future health 
impacts associated with these types of storms are uncertain 
and will depend on how climate change affects storm trends. 
During the period 1956 to 2006, lightning caused an estimated 
101.2 deaths per year,189 while thunderstorm winds are esti­
mated to have caused approximately 26 deaths per year from 
1977 to 2007.190 Thunderstorm precipitation and winds can 
damage structures, fell trees, and create hazardous road con­
ditions and impair driving visibility, increasing risks of motor 
vehicle deaths and injuries.134, 191, 192 Thunderstorm winds can 
cause blunt trauma or injuries, such as from being struck by 
falling trees and other flying debris,46 and were responsible for 
an estimated 4,366 injuries during the period 1993 to 2003.192
Winter storms can be accompanied by freezing winds and frig­
id temperatures that can cause frostbite and hypothermia (see 
also Ch. 2: Temperature-Related Deaths and Illness).193, 194 Indi­
viduals that lack proper clothing and shelter (for example, the 
homeless) are more at risk of injuries from direct exposure to 
weather conditions associated with winter storms and severe 
thunderstorms.195 Low-income populations have increased ex­
posure risk to severe winter weather conditions because they 
are more likely to live in low-quality, poorly insulated housing; 
be unable to afford sufficient domestic heating; or need to 
make tradeoffs between food and heating expenditures.196, 197 
Freezing rain, snow, and ice have been linked to increased in­
juries associated with falling198 as well as motor vehicle deaths 
and injuries due to treacherous road conditions and impaired 
driving visibility.134, 199 
After severe thunderstorms, individuals can suffer injuries 
during debris removal and cleanup activities192, 200 as well as 
exposure to hazards if flooding occurs (see Section 4.4 of this 
chapter). Mental health issues and stress are also possible 
after storms (see Ch. 8: Mental Health). This is especially true 
of thunderstorms associated with tornadoes, as the aftermath 
of the storm can involve dealing with the loss of property, dis­
placement, or loss of life.201 After winter storms, snow removal 
can be strenuous work and can increase the likelihood of ill­
ness and death for individuals with preexisting cardiovascular 
or pulmonary conditions.202 
4.8	 Emerging Issues
Climate change and changing patterns of extreme weather 
have the potential to strain the capacity of public health sys­
tems. However, few comprehensive or systematic studies have 
examined the human health impacts of such health-system 
strain.203 Particularly in the context of floods and hurricanes, 
the impacts on health systems from short- and long-term pop­
ulation displacement are not fully understood or well quan­
tified.67 In addition, the role of future population migration 
and demographic changes is just beginning to be elucidated 
in assessments of local adaptive capacity or resilience to the 
effects of future extreme events. Methodological challenges 
remain for accurately quantifying and attributing delayed 
Freezing rain, snow, and ice have been linked to increased 
injuries associated with treacherous road conditions and 
impaired driving visibility.

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
112
mortality associated with, but not caused directly by, extreme 
event exposure—for example, elevated mortality associated 
with heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and infections and other 
complications from injuries in populations exposed to hurri­
canes.30, 31
4.9	 Research Needs 
In addition the emerging issues identified above, the authors 
highlight the following potential areas for additional scientific 
and research activity on extreme events based on their review 
of the literature. Current understanding is limited by a lack 
of systematic surveillance for the range of health impacts, 
both short and long term, associated with a wider range of 
extreme events, including prolonged events like droughts and 
other extremes that do not currently trigger post-event health 
surveillance.  
Future assessments can benefit from multidisciplinary re­
search activities that:
•	 better define the health implications associated with partic­
ular extreme events where longer-term impacts, as well as 
regional differences in health outcomes, are currently not 
well understood, such as droughts and floods;
•	 enhance understanding of how specific attributes that 
contribute to individual and community level vulnerability to 
health impacts after extreme events, including social and be­
havioral characteristics, interact and contribute to or mitigate 
risks of adverse health outcomes; and
•	 examine how health outcomes can be impacted by other 
cumulative, compounding, or secondary effects of extreme 
events, such as access to or disruption of healthcare services 
and damages to and cascading failures of infrastructure.

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
113
Supporting Evidence
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING CHAPTER
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. Authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the 
overall report process, please see Appendices 2 and 3.
The health outcomes selected and prioritized for the chapter 
were based primarily on those that had substantial peer-
reviewed literature to support statements. While many 
connections between changes in extreme events due to 
climate change and human health impacts appear intuitive, in 
some cases there may not be a robust body of peer-reviewed 
literature to support statements about direct effects. For 
example, while it is believed that droughts have the ability to 
impact water quality, which could in turn impact health, there 
are few studies documenting specific health consequences in 
the United States.96 
In addition, due to space constraints, the authors did not 
intend to exhaustively identify all possible health impacts 
from every type of extreme event addressed in this chapter. 
Instead, the authors have provided an overview of possible 
impacts from different types of extreme events and provided 
a framework for understanding what additional factors 
(for example, population vulnerability, existing quality of 
infrastructure, etc.) can exacerbate or reduce adverse health 
outcomes.
Due to limited space and the uncertainty around future 
projections of tornadoes, we do not include detailed 
discussion of this topic in this chapter. We recognize that 
tornadoes can cause significant infrastructure damage 
and significant health impacts, and understanding how 
climate change will impact tornado intensity, frequency, 
and geographic distribution is an area of active scientific 
investigation. 
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Increased Exposure to Extreme Events
Key Finding 1: Health impacts associated with climate-related 
changes in exposure to extreme events include death, injury, 
or illness; exacerbation of underlying medical conditions; and 
adverse effects on mental health [High Confidence]. Climate 
change will increase exposure risk in some regions of the 
United States due to projected increases in the frequency 
and/or intensity of drought, wildfires, and flooding related to 
extreme precipitation and hurricanes [Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The Third National Climate Assessment (2014 NCA) provides 
the most recent, peer-reviewed assessment conclusions 
for projected increases in the frequency and/or intensity 
of extreme precipitation, hurricanes, coastal inundation, 
drought, and wildfires in the United States.2 To the extent 
that these extreme events are projected to increase in some 
regions of the United States, people are expected to be at 
greater risk of exposure to health hazards. 
Flooding associated with extreme precipitation, hurricanes, 
and coastal storms is expected to increase in some regions of 
the United States due to climate change, thereby increasing 
exposure to a variety of health hazards.9, 73, 74 The health 
impacts of floods and storms include death, injury, and illness; 
exacerbation of underlying medical conditions; and adverse 
effects on mental health.1, 29, 31, 46, 51, 52, 53, 58
Climate change is projected to lengthen or intensify droughts, 
especially in the Southwest,2, 144 which may increase exposure 
to a broad set of health hazards.9, 74 The potential health 
impacts of drought include: illness associated with reduced 
water quality and quantity 96, 100, 101, 102, 103 and reduced air 
quality,95, 118, 119 associations with increased rates of some 
infectious diseases,106, 107, 108, 109, 110 and adverse mental health 
impacts.94, 124, 125, 126, 127
Large, intense wildfires will occur more frequently in some 
regions of the United States, particularly in the western 
United States and Alaska,2 and this is expected to increase 
exposure to wildfire-related health risks.74, 144 The health 
impacts of wildfire include death, injury, and illness,134, 145, 146, 
151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 172, 173 including exacerbation of 
underlying medical conditions.154, 156, 157
Major uncertainties 
The role of climate change in observed shifts in and 
future projections of the frequency, intensity, geographic 
distribution, and duration of certain extreme events is an 
ongoing, active area of research. For example, although the 
2014 NCA2 concluded that extreme events will increase in 
some regions of the United States, uncertainties remain 
with respect to projections of climate impacts at smaller, 
more local scales and the timing of such impacts (see Table 
1). Climate change related projections of winter storms and 
severe storms, including tornadoes, hail, and thunderstorms, 
are still uncertain. 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
114
The human health implications of the changes in extreme 
events have not received as much research attention to 
date, and there are currently no published, national-scale, 
quantitative projections of changes in exposure risks for 
the four categories of extreme events addressed in this 
chapter. Relevant health surveillance and epidemiological 
data for extreme events are limited by underreporting, 
underestimation, and lack of a common definition of what 
constitutes an adverse health impact from an extreme 
event.30, 31 For drought in particular, there are few studies 
documenting specific health consequences in the United 
States.96 Challenges to quantitatively estimating future 
human health risks for the four types of extreme events 
addressed in this chapter include limited data availability 
and lack of comprehensive modeling methods. For winter 
storms and severe storms especially, scientists need a better 
understanding of how climate change will affect future storm 
trends before they can make projections of future health 
impacts.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
There is high confidence that the types of health impacts 
associated with climate-related changes in extremes include 
death, injury, or illness; exacerbation of underlying medical 
conditions; and adverse effects on mental health (see Table 
1). Based on the evidence presented in the peer-reviewed 
literature, there is medium confidence regarding increases 
in exposure to health hazards associated with projected 
increases in the frequency and/or intensity of extreme 
precipitation, hurricanes, coastal inundation, drought, 
and wildfires in some regions of the United States. Many 
qualitative studies have been published about the potential 
or expected health hazards from these events, but few draw 
strong or definitive conclusions that exposure to health 
hazards will increase due to climate change. Thus, the 
evidence is suggestive and supports a medium confidence 
level that, to the extent that these extreme events are 
projected to increase in some regions of the United States, 
people are expected to be at greater risk of exposure to 
health hazards. There is no quantitative information on which 
to base probability estimates of the likelihood of increasing 
exposure to health hazards associated with extreme 
precipitation, hurricanes, coastal inundation, drought, and 
wildfires.
Disruption of Essential Infrastructure
Key Finding 2: Many types of extreme events related to 
climate change cause disruption of infrastructure, including 
power, water, transportation, and communication systems, 
that are essential to maintaining access to health care and 
emergency response services and safeguarding human health 
[High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme events 
determines their physical impacts and the extent to which 
essential infrastructure is disrupted. There is strong, 
consistent evidence from multiple studies that infrastructure 
can either exacerbate or moderate the physical impacts of 
extreme events, influencing the ultimate nature and severity 
of health impacts. Projections of increasing frequency and/
or intensity of some extreme events suggest that they 
pose threats to essential infrastructure, such as water, 
transportation, and power systems.4, 34, 36, 43 Disruption of 
essential infrastructure and services after extreme events 
can increase population exposure to health hazards and 
reduce their adaptive capacity.4 There is substantial, high-
quality literature supporting a finding that serious health risks 
can arise from utility outages; infrastructure and housing 
damage; and disruption or loss of access to sanitation, 
safe food and water supplies, health care, communication, 
and transportation.1, 29, 30, 31, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 58, 87 
Infrastructure disruptions can have more or less impact on 
human health depending on the underlying vulnerability of 
the affected people and communities.4 Urban populations 
face unique exposure risks due to their dependence on 
complex, often interdependent infrastructure systems that 
can be severely disrupted during extreme events.2, 65 Rural 
communities also have vulnerabilities that are different from 
those faced by urban communities. For example, power and 
communications can take longer to restore after an outage.50
Existing infrastructure is generally designed to perform at its 
engineered capacity assuming historical weather patterns, 
and these systems could be more vulnerable to failure in 
response to weather-related stressors under future climate 
scenarios.4, 34, 35 Shifts in the frequency or intensity of extreme 
events outside their historical range pose infrastructure 
risks that may be compounded by the fact that much of the 
existing critical infrastructure in the United States, including 
water and sewage systems, roads, bridges, and power plants, 
are aging and in need of repair or replacement.4, 36
Major uncertainties
Many of the uncertainties are similar to those of the 
previous key finding. There are few studies directly linking 
infrastructure impacts to health outcomes, and most are not 
longitudinal. Health impacts may occur after the event as 
a result of loss of infrastructure and public services. These 
impacts can be distributed over longer periods of time, 
making them harder to observe and quantify. Thus, the actual 
impact is likely underreported.  
Uncertainties remain with respect to projecting how climate 
change will affect the severity of the physical impacts, 
including on infrastructure, of extreme events at smaller, 
more local scales and the timing of such impacts. Therefore, 
the subsequent impact on infrastructure also has a great 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
115
There is strong, consistent evidence in the literature that 
coastal flooding will increase exposure to a variety of health 
hazards—for example, direct physical impacts and impacts 
associated with disruption of essential infrastructure—
which can result in death, injury, or illness; exacerbation of 
underlying medical conditions; and adverse effects on mental 
health.1, 29, 31, 46, 51, 52, 53, 58 Multiple studies also consistently 
identify certain populations as especially vulnerable to 
the health impacts of coastal flooding. These populations 
include older adults (especially those who are frail, medically 
incapacitated, or residing in nursing or assisted living 
facilities), children, those reliant on electrically powered 
medical equipment like ventilators and oxygen supplies, 
those with preexisting health conditions, and people with 
disabilities.1, 8, 22, 43, 44, 53, 54, 195, 196, 197 In addition, differences 
in exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity lead to a 
disproportionate number of flood-related fatalities among 
older adults, males, and some low-income communities of 
color.29 Floods and storms also create occupational health 
risks to first responders and other emergency workers and 
to people involved in cleanup activities, construction, public 
utilities restoration, and security/policing.1, 73, 87, 88,
Major uncertainties
It is nearly certain that coastal flooding will increase in the 
United States. There are varying estimates regarding the 
exact degree of flooding at any particular location along the 
coast. Modeling does provide estimated ranges with varying 
levels of confidence depending on the location. There is 
greater uncertainty about how coastal flooding will impact 
the health of specific populations. There are various ways 
in which these key risk factors interact with and contribute 
to the vulnerability (comprised of exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity) of a population. Some uncertainties exist 
regarding the relative importance of each of these factors in 
determining a population’s vulnerability to health impacts 
from extreme events. In addition, there is some uncertainty 
regarding how future demographic and population changes 
may affect the relative importance of each of these factors.
Assessment of confidence based on evidence
Based on the evidence presented in the peer-reviewed 
literature, there is high confidence that coastal flooding will 
increase in the United States, and that age, health status, 
socioeconomic status, race/ethnicity, and occupation are 
key risk factors that individually and collectively affect a 
population’s vulnerability to health impacts from coastal 
flooding. Many qualitative studies have been published 
regarding how these key risk factors interact with and 
contribute to the exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity 
of a population, and this evidence is of good quality and 
consistent.
deal of uncertainty. Thus, the key finding does not make 
any statements about future impacts.  Instead the focus 
is on impacts that have occurred to date because there is 
supporting peer-reviewed literature. The extent to which 
infrastructure is exposed to extreme events, and the adaptive 
capacity of a community to repair infrastructure in a timely 
manner both influence the extent of the health outcomes. 
Thus, while the chapter makes general statements about 
trends in impacts due to extremes, there are uncertainties 
in the extent to which any specific location or infrastructure 
system could be impacted and the resulting health outcomes. 
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
There is high confidence that many types of extreme events 
can cause disruption of essential infrastructure (such as water, 
transportation, and power systems), and that such disruption 
can adversely affect human health. Many qualitative studies 
have been published about the effects of these factors on 
health impacts from an extreme event (noted above), and the 
evidence is of good quality and consistent.
Vulnerability to Coastal Flooding
Key Finding 3: Coastal populations with greater vulnerability 
to health impacts from coastal flooding include persons with 
disabilities or other access and functional needs, certain 
populations of color, older adults, pregnant women and 
children, low-income populations, and some occupational 
groups [High Confidence]. Climate change will increase 
exposure risk to coastal flooding due to increases in extreme 
precipitation and in hurricane intensity and rainfall rates, 
as well as sea level rise and the resulting increases in storm 
surge [High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The evidence in the peer-reviewed literature that climate 
change will increase coastal flooding in the future is very 
robust.2, 4 Global sea level has risen by about 8 inches since 
reliable record keeping began in 1880 and it is projected to 
rise another 1 to 4 feet by 2100.2 Rates of sea level rise are 
not uniform along U.S. coasts and can be exacerbated locally 
by land subsidence or reduced by uplift. In the next several 
decades, storm surges and high tides could combine with 
sea level rise and land subsidence to further increase coastal 
flooding in many regions. The U.S. East and Gulf coasts, Hawaii, 
and the U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands are particularly at risk. 
In addition, recurrent weather-related stressors, such as 
“nuisance flooding” (frequent coastal flooding causing 
public inconveniences), contribute to overall deterioration 
of infrastructure like stormwater drainage systems and 
roads (see Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness).38 These systems are 
important in the context of health because drainage helps 
to avoid sewage overflows and maintain water quality,39 
and roads are vital for evacuations and emergency response 
during and after extreme events.40

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
116
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
This assessment relies on two metrics to communicate 
the degree of certainty in Key Findings. See Appendix 4: 
Documenting Uncertainty for more on assessments of 
likelihood and confidence.
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 99–Firefighters battling fire: © Erich Schlegel/Corbis
Pg. 100–Family escaping flood waters: © Greg Vote/Corbis
Pg. 104–Young family in shelter: © © Robert Sciarrino/The 
Star-Ledger/Corbis
Pg. 105–Damaged power lines: © Julie Dermansky/Corbis
Pg. 107–Truck stuck in flood waters: © Mike Theiss/National
Geographic Creative/Corbis 
Pg. 108–Farmer in drought-stressed peanut field: © ERIK S.
LESSER/epa/Corbis
Pg. 109–Dust storm: © Martyn Goddard/Corbis
Pg. 110–Firefighters battling fire: © Erich Schlegel/Corbis
Pg. 111–Gridlocked traffic: © Robin Nelson/ZUMA Press/
Corbis
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
117
1.	
Lane, K., K. Charles-Guzman, K. Wheeler, Z. Abid, N. Gra­
ber, and T. Matte, 2013: Health effects of coastal storms and 
flooding in urban areas: A review and vulnerability assess­
ment. Journal of Environmental and Public Health, 2013, Arti­
cle ID 913064.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/913064 
2.	
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 
3.	
Moser, S.C., M.A. Davidson, P. Kirshen, P. Mulvaney, J.F. 
Murley, J.E. Neumann, L. Petes, and D. Reed, 2014: Ch. 25: 
Coastal zone development and ecosystems. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 579-618.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0MS3QNW 
4.	
IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and 
Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Spe­
cial Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovern­
mental Panel on Climate Change. Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. 
Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, 
K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. 
Midgley (Eds.), 582 pp. Cambridge University Press, Cam­
bridge, UK and New York, NY. http://ipcc-wg2.gov/SREX/
images/uploads/SREX-All_FINAL.pdf
5.	
Fothergill, A. and L.A. Peek, 2004: Poverty and disas­
ters in the United States: A review of recent sociological 
findings. Natural Hazards, 32, 89-110.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/B:NHAZ.0000026792.76181.d9 
6.	
Zoraster, R.M., 2010: Vulnerable populations: Hurricane 
Katrina as a case study. Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 25, 
74-78.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1049023x00007718 
7.	
Aldrich, N. and W.F. Benson, 2008: Disaster preparedness 
and the chronic disease needs of vulnerable older adults. 
Preventing Chronic Disease: Public Health Research, Practice, 
and Policy, 5, 1-7.  http://www.cdc.gov/pcd//issues/2008/
jan/07_0135.htm
8.	
Penner, S.J. and C. Wachsmuth, 2008: Disaster manage­
ment and populations with special needs. Disaster Manage­
ment Handbook. Pinkowski, J., Ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, 427-444.  
9.	
Frumkin, H., J. Hess, G. Luber, J. Malilay, and M. McGee­
hin, 2008: Climate change: The public health response. 
American Journal of Public Health, 98, 435-445.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.119362 
10.	 Keppel, K.G., 2007: Ten largest racial and ethnic health dis­
parities in the United States based on Healthy People 2010 
objectives. American Journal of Epidemiology, 166, 97-103. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm044 
11.	 Collins, T.W., A.M. Jimenez, and S.E. Grineski, 2013: His­
panic health disparities after a flood disaster: Results of a pop­
ulation-based survey of individuals experiencing home site 
damage in El Paso (Texas, USA). Journal of Immigrant and 
Minority Health, 15, 415-426.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10903-012-9626-2 
12.	 Weinhold, B., 2011: Fields and forests in flames: Vegetation 
smoke and human health. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
119, a386-a393.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.119-a386 
13.	 NRC, 2012: Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 244 pp.  
14.	 Brouwer, R., S. Akter, L. Brander, and E. Haque, 2007: 
Socioeconomic vulnerability and adaptation to environ­
mental risk: A case study of climate change and flooding 
in Bangladesh. Risk Analysis, 27, 313-326.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2007.00884.x 
15.	 Thomalla, F., T. Downing, E. Spanger-Siegfried, G. Han, 
and J. Rockström, 2006: Reducing hazard vulnerability: 
Towards a common approach between disaster risk reduc­
tion and climate adaptation. Disasters, 30, 39-48.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9523.2006.00305.x 
16.	 Tapsell, S.M., E.C. Penning-Rowsell, S.M. Tunstall, and T.L. 
Wilson, 2002: Vulnerability to flooding: Health and social 
dimensions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: 
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 360, 1511-
1525.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2002.1013 
17.	 Srinivasan, S., L.R. O’Fallon, and A. Dearry, 2003: Creating 
healthy communities, healthy homes, healthy people: Initi­
ating a research agenda on the built environment and public 
health. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 1446-1450. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/ajph.93.9.1446 
References

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
118
18.	 Bashir, S.A., 2002: Home is where the harm is: Inade­
quate housing as a public health crisis. American Journal 
of Public Health, 92, 733-738.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
ajph.92.5.733 
19.	 Cattell, V., 2001: Poor people, poor places, and poor health: 
The mediating role of social networks and social capital. 
Social Science & Medicine, 52, 1501-1516.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0277-9536(00)00259-8 
20.	 Masozera, M., M. Bailey, and C. Kerchner, 2007: Distribu­
tion of impacts of natural disasters across income groups: A 
case study of New Orleans. Ecological Economics, 63, 299-
306.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.06.013 
21.	 Keim, M.E., 2008: Building human resilience: The role of 
public health preparedness and response as an adaptation to 
climate change. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35, 
508-516.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.022 
22.	 Kovats, R.S. and S. Hajat, 2008: Heat stress and pub­
lic health: A critical review. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 29, 41-55.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
publhealth.29.020907.090843 
23.	 Engle, N.L., 2011: Adaptive capacity an    d its assessment. 
Global Environmental Change, 21, 647-656.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.01.019 
24.	 Cutter, S.L., L. Barnes, M. Berry, C. Burton, E. Evans, E. 
Tate, and J. Webb, 2008: A place-based model for under­
standing community resilience to natural disasters. Glob­
al Environmental Change, 18, 598-606.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.07.013 
25.	 Linnenluecke, M.K., A. Griffiths, and M. Winn, 2012: 
Extreme weather events and the critical importance of antic­
ipatory adaptation and organizational resilience in respond­
ing to impacts. Business Strategy and the Environment, 21, 
17-32.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bse.708 
26.	 Warner, K., N. Ranger, S. Surminski, M. Arnold, J. Linne­
rooth-Bayer, E. Michel-Kerjan, P. Kovacs, and C. Herweijer, 
2009: Adaptation to Climate Change: Linking Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Insurance. 30 pp. United Nations Interna­
tional Strategy for Disaster Reduction Secretariat, Geneva. 
http://www.unisdr.org/files/9654_linkingdrrinsurance.pdf 
27.	 Grineski, S.E., J.G. Staniswalis, P. Bulathsinhala, Y. Peng, 
and T.E. Gill, 2011: Hospital admissions for asthma and 
acute bronchitis in El Paso, Texas: Do age, sex, and insur­
ance status modify the effects of dust and low wind events? 
Environmental Research, 111, 1148-1155.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2011.06.007 
28.	 Hess, J.J., J.Z. McDowell, and G. Luber, 2012: Integrating 
climate change adaptation into public health practice: Using 
adaptive management to increase adaptive capacity and build 
resilience. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120, 171-179. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1103515 
29.	 Alderman, K., L.R. Turner, and S. Tong, 2012: Floods 
and human health: A systematic review. Environment 
International, 47, 37-47.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2012.06.003 
30.	 Senkbeil, J.C., D.M. Brommer, and I.J. Comstock, 2011: 
Tropical cyclone hazards in the USA. Geography Com­
pass, 5, 544-563.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
8198.2011.00439.x 
31.	 McKinney, N., C. Houser, and K. Meyer-Arendt, 2011: 
Direct and indirect mortality in Florida during the 2004 
hurricane season. International Journal of Biometeorology, 55, 
533-546.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00484-010-0370-9 
32.	 Guenther, R. and J. Balbus, 2014: Primary Protection: 
Enhancing Health Care Resilience for a Changing Climate. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://
toolkit.climate.gov/sites/default/files/SCRHCFI%20
Best%20Practices%20Report%20final2%202014%20Web.
pdf
33.	 Deshmukh, A., E. Ho Oh, and M. Hastak, 2011: Impact 
of flood damaged critical infrastructure on communities and 
industries. Built Environment Project and Asset Management, 1, 
156-175.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/20441241111180415 
34.	 Dell, J., S. Tierney, G. Franco, R.G. Newell, R. Richels, J. 
Weyant, and T.J. Wilbanks, 2014: Ch. 4: Energy supply and 
use. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, 
and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
Washington, D.C., 113-129.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/
J0BG2KWD 
35.	 GAO, 2015: Army Corps of Engineers Efforts to Assess the 
Impact of Extreme Weather Events. GAO-15-660. United 
States Government Accountability Office. http://www.gao.
gov/assets/680/671591.pdf
36.	 Cutter, S.L., W. Solecki, N. Bragado, J. Carmin, M. Fragkias, 
M. Ruth, and T. Wilbanks, 2014: Ch. 11: Urban systems, 
infrastructure, and vulnerability. Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. 
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. 
Global Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 282-
296.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0F769GR 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
119
37.	 ASCE, 2013: Report Card for America’s Infrastructure. 
American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. http://
www.infrastructurereportcard.org/
38.	 NOAA, 2014: Sea Level Rise and Nuisance Flood Frequen­
cy Changes around the United States. NOAA Technical 
Report NOS CO-OPS 073, 58 pp. U.S. Department of 
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis­
tration, National Ocean Service, Silver Spring, MD. http://
tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/NOAA_Technical_
Report_NOS_COOPS_073.pdf
39.	 Cann, K.F., D.R. Thomas, R.L. Salmon, A.P. Wyn-Jones, 
and D. Kay, 2013: Extreme water-related weather events 
and waterborne disease. Epidemiology and Infection, 141, 
671-86.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0950268812001653 
40.	 Skinner, M.W., N.M. Yantzi, and M.W. Rosenberg, 2009: 
Neither rain nor hail nor sleet nor snow: Provider perspec­
tives on the challenges of weather for home and community 
care. Social Science & Medicine, 68, 682-688.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.11.022 
41.	 Mooney, H., A. Larigauderie, M. Cesario, T. Elmquist, O. 
Hoegh-Guldberg, S. Lavorel, G.M. Mace, M. Palmer, R. 
Scholes, and T. Yahara, 2009: Biodiversity, climate change, 
and ecosystem services. Current Opinion in Environmental 
Sustainability, 1, 46-54.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cos­
ust.2009.07.006 
42.	 Kenny, J.F., N.L. Barber, S.S. Hutson, K.S. Linsey, J.K. 
Lovelace, and M.A. Maupin, 2009: Estimated Use of Water 
in the United States in 2005. U.S. Geological Survey Circu­
lar 1344, 52 pp. U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, VA. http://
pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1344/
43.	 Klinger, C., O. Landeg, and V. Murray, 2014: Power out­
ages, extreme events and health: A systematic review of 
the literature from 2011-2012. PLoS Currents, 6.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/currents.dis.04eb1dc5e73dd1377e­
05a10e9edde673 
44.	 Anderson, G.B. and M.L. Bell, 2012: Lights out: Impact of 
the August 2003 power outage on mortality in New York, 
NY. Epidemiology, 23, 189-193.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e318245c61c 
45.	 Lin, S., B.A. Fletcher, M. Luo, R. Chinery, and S.-A. 
Hwang, 2011: Health impact in New York City during the 
Northeastern blackout of 2003. Public Health Reports, 126, 
384-93. PMC3072860 
46.	 Goldman, A., B. Eggen, B. Golding, and V. Murray, 
2014: The health impacts of windstorms: A systematic lit­
erature review. Public Health, 128, 3-28.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.puhe.2013.09.022 
47.	 Daley, W.R., A. Smith, E. Paz-Argandona, J. Malilay, and 
M. McGeehin, 2000: An outbreak of carbon monoxide 
poisoning after a major ice storm in Maine. The Journal of 
Emergency Medicine, 18, 87-93.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0736-4679(99)00184-5 
48.	 Iqbal, S., J.H. Clower, S.A. Hernandez, S.A. Damon, and 
F.Y. Yip, 2012: A review of disaster-related carbon monoxide 
poisoning: Surveillance, epidemiology, and opportunities for 
prevention. American Journal of Public Health, 102, 1957-
1963.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2012.300674 
49.	 Lutterloh, E.C., S. Iqbal, J.H. Clower, H.A. Spillerr, M.A. 
Riggs, T.J. Sugg, K.E. Humbaugh, B.L. Cadwell, and D.A. 
Thoroughman, 2011: Carbon monoxide poisoning after 
an ice storm in Kentucky, 2009. Public Health Reports, 126 
(Suppl 1), 108-115. PMC3072909 
50.	 Hales, D., W. Hohenstein, M.D. Bidwell, C. Landry, D. 
McGranahan, J. Molnar, L.W. Morton, M. Vasquez, and J. 
Jadin, 2014: Ch. 14: Rural Communities. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
DC, 333-349.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J01Z429C 
51.	 Arrieta, M.I., R.D. Foreman, E.D. Crook, and M.L. Iceno­
gle, 2009: Providing continuity of care for chronic diseases 
in the aftermath of Katrina: From field experience to pol­
icy recommendations. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 3, 174-182.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
DMP.0b013e3181b66ae4 
52.	 Anderson, A.H., A.J. Cohen, N.G. Kutner, J.B. Kopp, P.L. 
Kimmel, and P. Muntner, 2009: Missed dialysis sessions 
and hospitalization in hemodialysis patients after Hurricane 
Katrina. Kidney International, 75, 1202-1208.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/ki.2009.5 
53.	 Kleinpeter, M.A., 2011: Disaster preparedness for dialysis 
patients. Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrolo­
gy, 6, 2337-2339.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2215/cjn.08690811 
54.	 Laditka, S.B., J.N. Laditka, S. Xirasagar, C.B. Cornman, 
C.B. Davis, and J.V.E. Richter, 2008: Providing shelter to 
nursing home evacuees in disasters: Lessons from Hurricane 
Katrina. American Journal of Public Health, 98, 1288-1293. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2006.107748 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
120
55.	 Battle, D.E., 2015: Persons with communication disabil­
ities in natural disasters, war, and/or conflict. Communi­
cation Disorders Quarterly, 36, 231-240.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1525740114545980 
56.	 Andrulis, D.P., N.J. Siddiqui, and J.L. Gantner, 2007: Pre­
paring racially and ethnically diverse communities for public 
health emergencies. Health Affairs, 26, 1269-1279.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.26.5.1269 
57.	 Lippmann, A.L., 2011: Disaster preparedness in vulnerable 
communities. International Law and Policy Review, 1, 69-96. 
58.	 Du, W., G.J. FitzGerald, M. Clark, and X.-Y. Hou, 
2010: Health impacts of floods. Prehospital and Disas­
ter Medicine, 25, 265-272.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1049023X00008141 
59.	 Solomon, G.M., M. Hjelmroos-Koski, M. Rotkin-Ellman, 
and S.K. Hammond, 2006: Ariborne mold and endotoxin 
concentrations in New Orleans, Louisiana, after flooding, 
October through November 2005. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114, 1381-1386.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.9198 
60.	 Fisk, W.J., E.A. Eliseeva, and M.J. Mendell, 2010: Associa­
tion of residential dampness and mold with respiratory tract 
infections and bronchitis: A meta-analysis. Environmental 
Health, 9, Article 72.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069x-9-72 
61.	 Fisk, W.J., Q. Lei-Gomez, and M.J. Mendell, 2007: 
Meta-analyses of the associations of respiratory health effects 
with dampness and mold in homes. Indoor Air, 17, 284-296. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2007.00475.x 
62.	 Mendell, M.J., A.G. Mirer, K. Cheung, and J. Douwes, 
2011: Respiratory and allergic health effects of dampness, 
mold, and dampness-related agents: A review of the epide­
miologic evidence. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 
748-756.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1002410 
63.	 Leavitt, W.M. and J.J. Kiefer, 2006: Infrastructure interde­
pendency and the creation of a normal disaster: The case 
of Hurricane Katrina and the City of New Orleans. Public 
Works Management & Policy 10, 303-314.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1087724X06289055 
64.	 Wilbanks, T.J. and S.J. Fernandez, Eds., 2014: Climate 
Change and Infrastructure, Urban Systems, and Vulnerabilities. 
Technical Report for the U.S. Department of Energy in Support 
of the National Climate Assessment. Island Press, Washington, 
D.C., 88 pp.  http://www.cakex.org/sites/default/files/docu­
ments/Climate%20ChangeAndInfrastructureUrbanSystem­
sAndVulnerabilities.pdf
65.	 Kirshen, P., M. Ruth, and W. Anderson, 2008: Interdepen­
dencies of urban climate change impacts and adaptation 
strategies: A case study of Metropolitan Boston USA. Cli­
matic Change, 86, 105-122.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-007-9252-5 
66.	 Steinberg, L.J., H. Sengul, and A.M. Cruz, 2008: Natech 
risk and management: An assessment of the state of the art. 
Natural Hazards, 46, 143-152.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-007-9205-3 
67.	 Knowlton, K., M. Rotkin-Ellman, L. Geballe, W. Max, and 
G.M. Solomon, 2011: Six climate change-related events in 
the United States accounted for about $14 billion in lost 
lives and health costs. Health Affairs, 30, 2167-2176.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0229 
68.	 Kile, J.C., S. Skowronski, M.D. Miller, S.G. Reissman, V. 
Balaban, R.W. Klomp, D.B. Reissman, H.M. Mainzer, and 
A.L. Dannenberg, 2005: Impact of 2003 power outages 
on public health and emergency response. Prehospital and 
Disaster Medicine, 20, 93-97.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
s1049023x00002259 
69.	 Prezant, D.J., J. Clair, S. Belyaev, D. Alleyne, G.I. Banauch, 
M. Davitt, K. Vandervoorts, K.J. Kelly, B. Currie, and G. 
Kalkut, 2005: Effects of the August 2003 blackout on the 
New York City healthcare delivery system: A lesson for 
disaster preparedness. Critical Care Medicine, 33, S96-S101. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.ccm.0000150956.90030.23 
70.	 Freese, J., N.J. Richmond, R.A. Silverman, J. Braun, B.J. 
Kaufman, and J. Clair, 2006: Impact of  citywide blackout on 
an urban emergency medical services system. Prehospital and 
Disaster Medicine, 21, 372-378.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1049023X00004064 
71.	 Klein, K.R., P. Herzog, S. Smolinske, and S.R. White, 2007: 
Demand for poison control center services “surged” during 
the 2003 blackout. Clinical Toxicology, 45, 248-254.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15563650601031676 
72.	 Beatty, M.E., S. Phelps, C. Rohner, and I. Weisfuse, 2006: 
Blackout of 2003: Health effects and emergency responses. 
Public Health Reports, 121, 36-44. PMC1497795 
73.	 Lowe, D., K. Ebi, and B. Forsberg, 2013: Factors increas­
ing vulnerability to health effects before, during and after 
floods. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 10, 7015-7067.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph10127015 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
121
74.	 Luber, G., K. Knowlton, J. Balbus, H. Frumkin, M. 
Hayden, J. Hess, M. McGeehin, N. Sheats, L. Backer, C.B. 
Beard, K.L. Ebi, E. Maibach, R.S. Ostfeld, C. Wiedinmyer, 
E. Zielinski-Gutiérrez, and L. Ziska, 2014: Ch. 9: Human 
health. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The 
Third National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Rich­
mond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 220-256.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0PN93H5 
75.	 Georgakakos, A., P. Fleming, M. Dettinger, C. Peters-Li­
dard, T.C. Richmond, K. Reckhow, K. White, and D. Yates, 
2014: Ch. 3: Water resources. Climate Change Impacts in the 
United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. Melil­
lo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Glob­
al Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 69-112. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0G44N6T 
76.	 Kellar, D.M.M. and T.W. Schmidlin, 2012: Vehicle-re­
lated flood deaths in the United States, 1995-2005. Jour­
nal of Flood Risk Management, 5, 153-163.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1753-318X.2012.01136.x 
77.	 Sharif, H.O., T.L. Jackson, M.M. Hossain, and D. Zane, 
2014: Analysis of flood fatalities in Texas. Natural Hazards 
Review, 16, 04014016.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/(asce)
nh.1527-6996.0000145 
78.	 Špitalar, M., J.J. Gourley, C. Lutoff, P.-E. Kirstetter, M. Bril­
ly, and N. Carr, 2014: Analysis of flash flood parameters 
and human impacts in the US from 2006 to 2012. Journal 
of Hydrology, 519, 863-870.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhydrol.2014.07.004 
79.	 Rappaport, E.N., 2014: Fatalities in the United States from 
Atlantic tropical cyclones: New data and interpretation. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 95, 341-346. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/bams-d-12-00074.1 
80.	 Villarini, G., R. Goska, J.A. Smith, and G.A. Vecchi, 2014: 
North Atlantic tropical cyclones and U.S. flooding. Bulle­
tin of the American Meteorological Society, 95, 1381-1388. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/bams-d-13-00060.1 
81.	 Rowe, S.T. and G. Villarini, 2013: Flooding associated with 
predecessor rain events over the Midwest United States. 
Environmental Research Letters, 8, 024007.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024007 
82.	 Schumacher, R.S. and T.J. Galarneau, 2012: Moisture 
transport into midlatitudes ahead of recurving tropical 
cyclones and its relevance in two predecessor rain events. 
Monthly Weather Review, 140, 1810-1827.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/mwr-d-11-00307.1 
83.	 Beven, J.L., II, L.A. Avila, E.S. Blake, D.P. Brown, J.L. 
Franklin, R.D. Knabb, R.J. Pasch, J.R. Rhome, and 
S.R. Stewart, 2008: Atlantic hurricane season of 2005. 
Monthly Weather Review, 136, 1109-1173.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/2007MWR2074.1 
84.	 Brunkard, J., G. Namulanda, and R. Ratard, 2008: Hur­
ricane Katrina deaths, Louisiana, 2005. Disaster Medicine 
and Public Health Preparedness, 2, 215-223.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/DMP.0b013e31818aaf55 
85.	 Casey-Lockyer, M., R.J. Heick, C.E. Mertzlufft, E.E. Yard, 
A.F. Wolkin, R.S. Noe, and M. Murti, 2013: Deaths asso­
ciated with Hurricane Sandy-October-November 2012. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 62, 393-
392. 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6220a1.htm
86.	 NOAA, 2013: Service Assessment: Hurricane/Post-Tropical 
Cyclone Sandy, October 22–29, 2012. 66 pp. U.S. Depart­
ment of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, National Weather Service, Silver Spring, 
MD. 
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/pdfs/San­
dy13.pdf
87.	 Schulte, P.A. and H. Chun, 2009: Climate change and occu­
pational safety and health: Establishing a preliminary frame­
work. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, 6, 
542-554.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15459620903066008 
88.	 Osofsky, H.J., J.D. Osofsky, J. Arey, M.E. Kronenberg, 
T. Hansel, and M. Many, 2011: Hurricane Katrina’s first 
responders: The struggle to protect and serve in the after­
math of the disaster. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 5, S214-S219.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
dmp.2011.53 
89.	 Tong, V.T., M.E. Zotti, and J. Hsia, 2011: Impact of the Red 
River catastrophic flood on women giving birth in North 
Dakota, 1994–2000. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 15, 
281-288.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10995-010-0576-9 
90.	 Xiong, X., E.W. Harville, D.R. Mattison, K. Elkind-Hirsch, 
G. Pridjian, and P. Buekens, 2008: Exposure to Hurricane 
Katrina, post-traumatic stress disorder and birth outcomes. 
The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 336, 111-115. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MAJ.0b013e318180f21c 
91.	 Peek, L. and L.M. Stough, 2010: Children with disabilities 
in the context of disaster: A social vulnerability perspective. 
Child Development, 81, 1260-1270.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1
111/j.1467-8624.2010.01466 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
122
92.	 Brandenburg, M.A., S.M. Watkins, K.L. Brandenburg, 
and C. Schieche, 2007: Operation Child-ID: Reunifying 
children with their legal guardians after Hurricane Katrina. 
Disasters, 31, 277-287.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0361-
3666.2007.01009.x 
93.	 Thomas, D.S.K., B.D. Phillips, W.E. Lovekamp, and A. 
Fothergill, 2013: Social Vulnerability to Disasters, 2nd ed. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 514 pp.  
94.	 Stanke, C., M. Kerac, C. Prudhomme, J. Medlock, and 
V. Murray, 2013: Health effects of drought: A systematic 
review of the evidence. Plos Currents Disasters.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/currents.dis.7a2cee9e980f91ad7697b570bc­
c4b004 
95.	 CDC, EPA, NOAA, and AWWA, 2010: When Every Drop 
Counts: Protecting Public Health During Drought Condi­
tions—A Guide for Public Health Professionals. 56 pp. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. http://www.
cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/Docs/When_Every_Drop_Counts.pdf
96.	 Whitehead, P.G., R.L. Wilby, R.W. Battarbee, M. Kernan, 
and A.J. Wade, 2009: A review of the potential impacts of 
climate change on surface water quality. Hydrological Sci­
ences Journal, 54, 101-123.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1623/
hysj.54.1.101 
97.	 Barlow, P.M., 2003: Ground Water in Freshwater-Saltwater 
Environments of the Atlantic Coast. U.S. Geological Survey 
Circular 1262, 113 pp., Reston, VA. http://pubs.usgs.gov/
circ/2003/circ1262/pdf/circ1262.pdf
98.	 Renken, R.A., J. Dixon, J. Koehmstedt, S. Ishman, A.C. 
Lietz, R.L. Marella, P. Telis, J. Rogers, and S. Memberg, 
2005: Impact of Anthropogenic Development on Coastal 
Ground-Water Hydrology in Southeastern Florida, 1900-
2000. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1275, 77 pp. U.S. 
Geological Survey, Reston, VA. http://sofia.usgs.gov/publi­
cations/circular/1275/cir1275_renken.pdf
99.	 Dausman, A. and C.D. Langevin, 2005: Movement of 
the Saltwater Interface in the Surficial Aquifer System in 
Response to Hydrologic Stresses and Water-Management 
Practices, Broward County, Florida. U.S. Geological Survey 
Scientific Investigations Report 2004-5256, 73 pp., Reston, 
VA. http://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2004/5256/pdf/sir20045256.
pdf
100.	 Olds, B.P., B.C. Peterson, K.D. Koupal, K.M. Farn­
sworth-Hoback, C.W. Schoenebeck, and W.W. Hoback, 
2011: Water quality parameters of a Nebraska reservoir differ 
between drought and normal conditions. Lake and Reservoir 
Management, 27, 229-234.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/074
38141.2011.601401 
101.	 Zwolsman, J.J.G. and A.J. van Bokhoven, 2007: Impact of 
summer droughts on water quality of the Rhine River - a 
preview of climate change? Water Science & Technology, 56, 
45-55.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.535 
102.	 Delpla, I., A.-V. Jung, E. Baures, M. Clement, and O. Thom­
as, 2009: Impacts of climate change on surface water qual­
ity in relation to drinking water production. Environment 
International, 35, 1225-1233.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2009.07.001 
103.	 van Vliet, M.T.H. and J.J.G. Zwolsman, 2008: Impact of 
summer droughts on the water quality of the Meuse river. 
Journal of Hydrology, 353, 1-17.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhydrol.2008.01.001 
104.	 Charron, D.F., M.K. Thomas, D. Waltner-Toews, J.J. 
Aramini, T. Edge, R.A. Kent, A.R. Maarouf, and J. Wilson, 
2004: Vulnerability of waterborne diseases to climate change 
in Canada: A review. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental 
Health, Part A: Current Issues, 67, 1667-1677.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/15287390490492313 
105.	 Lal, A., M.G. Baker, S. Hales, and N.P. French, 2013: Poten­
tial effects of global environmental changes on cryptosporid­
iosis and giardiasis transmission. Trends in Parasitology, 29, 
83-90.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2012.10.005 
106.	 Epstein, P.R. and C. Defilippo, 2001: West Nile virus and 
drought. Global Change and Human Health, 2, 105-107. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/a:1015089901425 
107.	 Johnson, B.J. and M.V.K. Sukhdeo, 2013: Drought-induced 
amplification of local and regional West Nile virus infection 
rates in New Jersey. Journal of Medical Entomology, 50, 195-
204.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/me12035 
108.	 Shaman, J., J.F. Day, and N. Komar, 2010: Hydrologic con­
ditions describe West Nile virus risk in Colorado. Interna­
tional Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 7, 
494-508.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7020494 
109.	 Landesman, W.J., B.F. Allan, R.B. Langerhans, T.M. Knight, 
and J.M. Chase, 2007: Inter-annual associations between 
precipitation and human incidence of West Nile Virus in the 
United States. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 7, 337-
343.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2006.0590 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
123
110.	 Wang, G., R.B. Minnis, J.L. Belant, and C.L. Wax, 2010: 
Dry weather induces outbreaks of human West Nile virus 
infections. BMC Infectious Diseases, 10, 38.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2334-10-38 
111.	 Shaman, J., J.F. Day, and M. Stieglitz, 2005: Drought-in­
duced amplification and epidemic transmission of West Nile 
virus in southern Florida. Journal of Medical Entomology, 42, 
134-141.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/42.2.134 
112.	 Hjelle, B. and F. Torres-Pérez, 2010: Hantaviruses in the 
Americas and their role as emerging pathogens. Viruses, 2, 
2559-2586.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/v2122559 
113.	 Clement, J., J. Vercauteren, W.W. Verstraeten, G. Ducof­
fre, J.M. Barrios, A.-M. Vandamme, P. Maes, and M. Van 
Ranst, 2009: Relating increasing hantavirus incidences 
to the changing climate: The mast connection. Interna­
tional Journal of Health Geographics, 8, 1.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-072x-8-1 
114.	 Kuenzi, A.J., M.L. Morrison, N.K. Madhav, and J.N. Mills, 
2007: Brush mouse (Peromyscus boylii ) population dynam­
ics and hantavirus infection during a warm, drought period 
in southern Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Diseases, 43, 675-
683.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7589/0090-3558-43.4.675 
115.	 Klein, S.L. and C.H. Calisher, 2007: Emergence and per­
sistence of hantaviruses. Wildlife and Emerging Zoonotic 
Diseases: The Biology, Circumstances and Consequences of 
Cross-Species Transmission. Childs, J.E., J.S. Mackenzie, and 
J.A. Richt, Eds. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 217-252.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_10 
116.	 Reusken, C. and P. Heyman, 2013: Factors driving hanta­
virus emergence in Europe. Current Opinion in Virology, 3, 
92-99.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2013.01.002 
117.	 Watson, D.C., M. Sargianou, A. Papa, P. Chra, I. Starakis, 
and G. Panos, 2014: Epidemiology of Hantavirus infec­
tions in humans: A comprehensive, global overview. Critical 
Reviews in Microbiology, 40, 261-272.  http://dx.doi.org/10
.3109/1040841x.2013.783555 
118.	 Peterson, T.C., T.R. Karl, J.P. Kossin, K.E. Kunkel, J.H. 
Lawrimore, J.R. McMahon, R.S. Vose, and X. Yin, 2014: 
Changes in weather and climate extremes: State of knowl­
edge relevant to air and water quality in the United States. 
Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 64, 184-
197.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2013.851044 
119.	 Munson, S.M., J. Belnap, and G.S. Okin, 2011: Responses 
of wind erosion to climate-induced vegetation changes on 
the Colorado Plateau. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 108, 3854-3859.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1014947108 
120.	 Neu, J.L. and M.J. Prather, 2012: Toward a more physical 
representation of precipitation scavenging in global chemis­
try models: Cloud overlap and ice physics and their impact 
on tropospheric ozone. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 
12, 3289-3310.  http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/acp-12-3289-
2012 
121.	 EPA, 2009: Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate 
Matter. EPA/600/R-08/139F. National Center for Environ­
mental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Trian­
gle Park, NC. http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.
cfm?deid=216546
122.	 Morman, S.A. and G.S. Plumlee, 2013: The role of airborne 
mineral dusts in human disease. Aeolian Research, 9, 203-
212.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aeolia.2012.12.001 
123.	 Puett, R.C., J. Schwartz, J.E. Hart, J.D. Yanosky, F.E. Speiz­
er, H. Suh, C.J. Paciorek, L.M. Neas, and F. Laden, 2008: 
Chronic particulate exposure, mortality, and coronary heart 
disease in the Nurses’ Health Study. American Journal of Epi­
demiology, 168, 1161-1168.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/
kwn232 
124.	 Fritze, J.G., G.A. Blashki, S. Burke, and J. Wiseman, 2008: 
Hope, despair and transformation: Climate change and the 
promotion of mental health and wellbeing. Internation­
al Journal of Mental Health Systems, 2, 13.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1752-4458-2-13 
125.	 Obrien, L.V., H.L. Berry, C. Coleman, and I.C. Hanigan, 
2014: Drought as a mental health exposure. Environmen­
tal Research, 131, 181-187.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2014.03.014 
126.	 Carnie, T.-L., H.L. Berry, S.A. Blinkhorn, and C.R. Hart, 
2011: In their own words: Young people’s mental health in 
drought-affected rural and remote NSW. Australian Journal 
of Rural Health, 19, 244-248.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1440-1584.2011.01224.x 
127.	 Hanigan, I.C., C.D. Butler, P.N. Kokic, and M.F. Hutchin­
son, 2012: Suicide and drought in New South Wales, Aus­
tralia, 1970–2007. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 109, 13950-13955.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1112965109 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
124
128.	 Brahney, J., A.P. Ballantyne, C. Sievers, and J.C. Neff, 2013: 
Increasing Ca2+ deposition in the western US: The role of 
mineral aerosols. Aeolian Research, 10, 77-87.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.aeolia.2013.04.003 
129.	 Reheis, M.C. and F.E. Urban, 2011: Regional and climat­
ic controls on seasonal dust deposition in the southwestern 
U.S. Aeolian Research, 3, 3-21.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
aeolia.2011.03.008 
130.	 Belnap, J., B.J. Walker, S.M. Munson, and R.A. Gill, 2014: 
Controls on sediment production in two U.S. deserts. Aeo­
lian Research, 14, 15-24.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aeo­
lia.2014.03.007 
131.	 Ginoux, P., J.M. Prospero, T.E. Gill, N.C. Hsu, and M. 
Zhao, 2012: Global-scale attribution of anthropogenic 
and natural dust sources and their emission rates based on 
MODIS Deep Blue aerosol products. Reviews of Geophysics, 
50, RG3005.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2012rg000388 
132.	 Hefflin, B.J., B. Jalaludin, E. McClure, N. Cobb, C.A. John­
son, L. Jecha, and R.A. Etzel, 1994: Surveillance for dust 
storms and respiratory diseases in Washington State, 1991. 
Archives of Environmental Health: An International Journal, 
49, 170-174.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00039896.1994.9
940378 
133.	 Panikkath, R., C.A. Jumper, and Z. Mulkey, 2013: Multilo­
bar lung infiltrates after exposure to dust storm: The haboob 
lung syndrome. The American Journal of Medicine, 126, 
e5-e7.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.08.012 
134.	 Ashley, W.S., S. Strader, D.C. Dziubla, and A. Haberlie, 
2015: Driving blind: Weather-related vision hazards and 
fatal motor vehicle crashes. Bulletin of the American Mete­
orological Society, 96, 755-778.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/
BAMS-D-14-00026.1 
135.	 Ashley, W.S. and A.W. Black, 2008: Fatalities associated 
with nonconvective high-wind events in the United States. 
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 47, 717-725. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/2007jamc1689.1 
136.	 Beggs, P.J., 2004: Impacts of climate change on aeroal­
lergens: Past and future. Clinical & Experimental Aller­
gy, 34, 1507-1513.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2222.2004.02061.x 
137.	 Pfaller, M.A., P.G. Pappas, and J.R. Wingard, 2006: Inva­
sive fungal pathogens: Current epidemiological trends. Clin­
ical Infectious Diseases, 43 Supp 1, S3-S14.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/504490 
138.	 Smith, C.E., 1946: Effect of season and dust control on 
Coccidioidomycosis. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 132, 833-838.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.1946.02870490011003 
139.	 Park, B.J., K. Sigel, V. Vaz, K. Komatsu, C. McRill, M. Phel­
an, T. Colman, A.C. Comrie, D.W. Warnock, J.N. Galgiani, 
and R.A. Hajjeh, 2005: An epidemic of Coccidioidomyco­
sis in Arizona associated with climatic changes, 1998–2001. 
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 191, 1981-1987.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/430092 
140.	 Zender, C.S. and J. Talamantes, 2006: Climate controls on 
valley fever incidence in Kern County, California. Interna­
tional Journal of Biometeorology, 50, 174-182.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s00484-005-0007-6 
141.	 Marsden-Haug, N., H. Hill, A.P. Litvintseva, D.M. 
Engelthaler, E.M. Driebe, C.C. Roe, C. Ralston, S. Hurst, 
M. Goldoft, L. Gade, R. Wohrle, G.R. Thompson, M.E. 
Brandt, and T. Chiller, 2014: Coccidioides immitis identi­
fied in soil outside of its known range - Washington, 2013. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 450. 
PMID:24848217 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm6320a3.htm
142.	 Litvintseva, A.P., N. Marsden-Haug, S. Hurst, H. Hill, 
L. Gade, E.M. Driebe, C. Ralston, C. Roe, B.M. Barker, 
M. Goldoft, P. Keim, R. Wohrle, G.R. Thompson, D.M. 
Engelthaler, M.E. Brandt, and T. Chiller, 2015: Valley fever: 
Finding new places for an old disease: Coccidioides immitis 
found in Washington State soil associated with recent human 
infection. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 60, e1-e3.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciu681 
143.	 Garcia-Solache, M.A. and A. Casadevall, 2010: Global 
warming will bring new fungal diseases for mammals. mBio, 
1, e00061-10.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00061-10 
144.	 Garfin, G., G. Franco, H. Blanco, A. Comrie, P. Gonzalez, T. 
Piechota, R. Smyth, and R. Waskom, 2014: Ch. 20: South­
west. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, 
and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
Washington, D.C., 462-486.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/
J08G8HMN 
145.	 Naeher, L.P., M. Brauer, M. Lipsett, J.T. Zelikoff, C.D. 
Simpson, J.Q. Koenig, and K.R. Smith, 2007: Woodsmoke 
health effects: A review. Inhalation Toxicology, 19, 67-106. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08958370600985875 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
125
146.	 Stefanidou, M., S. Athanaselis, and C. Spiliopou­
lou, 2008: Health impacts of fire smoke inhalation. 
Inhalation Toxicology, 20, 761-766.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/08958370801975311 
147.	 Wegesser, T.C., K.E. Pinkerton, and J.A. Last, 2009: Cali­
fornia wildfires of 2008: Coarse and fine particulate matter 
toxicity. Environmental Health Perspectives, 117, 893-897. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800166 
148.	 Viswanathan, S., L. Eria, N. Diunugala, J. Johnson, and C. 
McClean, 2006: An analysis of effects of San Diego wildfire 
on ambient air quality. Journal of the Air & Waste Manage­
ment Association, 56, 56-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10
473289.2006.10464439 
149.	 Sapkota, A., J.M. Symons, J. Kleissl, L. Wang, M.B. Par­
lange, J. Ondov, P.N. Breysse, G.B. Diette, P.A. Eggleston, 
and T.J. Buckley, 2005: Impact of the 2002 Canadian for­
est fires on particulate matter air quality in Baltimore City. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 39, 24-32.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/es035311z 
150.	 Youssouf, H., C. Liousse, L. Roblou, E.M. Assamoi, R.O. 
Salonen, C. Maesano, S. Banerjee, and I. Annesi-Maesa­
no, 2014: Quantifying wildfires exposure for investigating 
health-related effects. Atmospheric Environment, 97, 239-
251.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.07.041 
151.	 Holstius, D.M., C.E. Reid, B.M. Jesdale, and R. Morel­
lo-Frosch, 2012: Birth weight following pregnancy during 
the 2003 southern California wildfires. Environmen­
tal Health Perspectives, 120, 1340-1345.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1104515 
152.	 Johnston, F., I. Hanigan, S. Henderson, G. Morgan, and D. 
Bowman, 2011: Extreme air pollution events from bush­
fires and dust storms and their association with mortality in 
Sydney, Australia 1994–2007. Environmental Research, 111, 
811-816.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2011.05.007 
153.	 Elliott, C., S. Henderson, and V. Wan, 2013: Time series 
analysis of fine particulate matter and asthma reliever dis­
pensations in populations affected by forest fires. Environ­
mental Health, 12, 11.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069X-12-11 
154.	 Henderson, S.B., M. Brauer, Y.C. Macnab, and S.M. Ken­
nedy, 2011: Three measures of forest fire smoke exposure 
and their associations with respiratory and cardiovascular 
health outcomes in a population-based cohort. Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 119, 1266-1271.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1002288 
155.	 Henderson, S.B. and F.H. Johnston, 2012: Measures of for­
est fire smoke exposure and their associations with respira­
tory health outcomes. Current Opinion in Allergy and Clin­
ical Immunology, 12, 221-227.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
ACI.0b013e328353351f 
156.	 Delfino, R.J., S. Brummel, J. Wu, H. Stern, B. Ostro, M. 
Lipsett, A. Winer, D.H. Street, L. Zhang, T. Tjoa, and D.L. 
Gillen, 2009: The relationship of respiratory and cardiovas­
cular hospital admissions to the southern California wildfires 
of 2003. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 66, 189-
197.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/oem.2008.041376 
157.	 Rappold, A.G., S.L. Stone, W.E. Cascio, L.M. Neas, V.J. 
Kilaru, M.S. Carraway, J.J. Szykman, A. Ising, W.E. Cleve, 
J.T. Meredith, H. Vaughan-Batten, L. Deyneka, and R.B. 
Devlin, 2011: Peat bog wildfire smoke exposure in rural 
North Carolina is associated with cardiopulmonary emer­
gency department visits assessed through syndromic surveil­
lance. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 1415-1420. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1003206 
158.	 Sutherland, E.R., B.J. Make, S. Vedal, L. Zhang, S.J. Dut­
ton, J.R. Murphy, and P.E. Silkoff, 2005: Wildfire smoke 
and respiratory symptoms in patients with chronic obstruc­
tive pulmonary disease. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 115, 420-422.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaci.2004.11.030 
159.	 Garcia, C.A., P.-S. Yap, H.-Y. Park, and B.L. Weller, 2015: 
Association of long-term PM2.5 exposure with mortality 
using different air pollution exposure models: Impacts in 
rural and urban California. International Journal of Envi­
ronmental Health Research, Published online 17 July 2015. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09603123.2015.1061113 
160.	 Gold, D.R., A. Litonjua, J. Schwartz, E. Lovett, A. Larson, 
B. Nearing, G. Allen, M. Verrier, R. Cherry, and R. Verri­
er, 2000: Ambient pollution and heart rate variability. Cir­
culation, 101, 1267-1273.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.
CIR.101.11.1267 
161.	 Pope, C.A., III, M.C. Turner, R.T. Burnett, M. Jerrett, S.M. 
Gapstur, W.R. Diver, D. Krewski, and R.D. Brook, 2015: 
Relationships between fine particulate air pollution, car­
diometabolic disorders, and cardiovascular mortality. Circu­
lation Research, 116, 108-115.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.116.305060 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
126
162.	 Pope, C.A., III, R.T. Burnett, G.D. Thurston, M.J. Thun, 
E.E. Calle, D. Krewski, and J.J. Godleski, 2004: Cardio­
vascular mortality and long-term exposure to particulate air 
pollution: Epidemiological evidence of general pathophysio­
logical pathways of disease. Circulation, 109, 71-77.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000108927.80044.7F 
163.	 Phuleria, H.C., P.M. Fine, Y. Zhu, and C. Sioutas, 2005: 
Air quality impacts of the October 2003 southern Califor­
nia wildfires. Journal of Geophysical Research, 110, D07S20. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2004jd004626 
164.	 Thelen, B., N.H.F. French, B.W. Koziol, M. Billmire, R.C. 
Owen, J. Johnson, M. Ginsberg, T. Loboda, and S. Wu, 
2013: Modeling acute respiratory illness during the 2007 
San Diego wildland fires using a coupled emissions-trans­
port system and generalized additive modeling. Environ­
mental Health, 12, 94.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069x-12-94 
165.	 Olsen, C.S., D.K. Mazzotta, E. Toman, and A.P. Fischer, 
2014: Communicating about smoke from wildland fire: 
Challenges and opportunities for managers. Environmen­
tal Management, 54, 571-582.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-014-0312-0 
166.	 Richardson, L.A., P.A. Champ, and J.B. Loomis, 2012: The 
hidden cost of wildfires: Economic valuation of health effects 
of wildfire smoke exposure in Southern California. Journal 
of Forest Economics, 18, 14-35.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jfe.2011.05.002 
167.	 McMeeking, G.R., S.M. Kreidenweis, M. Lunden, J. Carril­
lo, C.M. Carrico, T. Lee, P. Herckes, G. Engling, D.E. Day, 
J. Hand, N. Brown, W.C. Malm, and J.L. Collett, 2006: 
Smoke-impacted regional haze in California during the sum­
mer of 2002. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 137, 25-42. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2006.01.011 
168.	 Youssouf, H., C. Liousse, L. Roblou, E.-M. Assamoi, R.O. 
Salonen, C. Maesano, S. Banerjee, and I. Annesi-Maesano, 
2014: Non-accidental health impacts of wildfire smoke. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Pub­
lic Health, 11, 11772-11804.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph111111772 
169.	 Künzli, N., E. Avol, J. Wu, W.J. Gauderman, E. Rappaport, 
J. Millstein, J. Bennion, R. McConnell, F.D. Gilliland, K. 
Berhane, F. Lurmann, A. Winer, and J.M. Peters, 2006: 
Health effects of the 2003 southern California wildfires on 
children. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine, 174, 1221-1228.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.200604-519OC 
170.	 Leonard, S.S., V. Castranova, B.T. Chen, D. Schwegler-Berry, 
M. Hoover, C. Piacitelli, and D.M. Gaughan, 2007: Particle 
size-dependent radical generation from wildland fire smoke. 
Toxicology, 236, 103-113.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tox.2007.04.008 
171.	 Ghilarducci, D.P. and R.S. Tjeerdema, 1995: Fate and effects 
of acrolein. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and 
Toxicology, 144, 95-146.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4612-2550-8_2 
172.	 Squire, B., C. Chidester, and S. Raby, 2011: Medical events 
during the 2009 Los Angeles County Station fire: Lessons for 
wildfire EMS planning. Prehospital Emergency Care, 15, 464-
472.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/10903127.2011.598607 
173.	 Booze, T.F., T.E. Reinhardt, S.J. Quiring, and R.D. Ott­
mar, 2004: A screening-level assessment of the health risks 
of chronic smoke exposure for wildland firefighters. Journal 
of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, 1, 296-305. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15459620490442500 
174.	 Caamano-Isorna, F., A. Figueiras, I. Sastre, A. Montes-Mar­
tinez, M. Taracido, and M. Pineiro-Lamas, 2011: Respirato­
ry and mental health effects of wildfires: An ecological study 
in Galician municipalities (north-west Spain). Environmen­
tal Health, 10, Article 48.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069X-10-48 
175.	 Jones, R.T., D.P. Ribbe, P.B. Cunningham, J.D. Weddle, and 
A.K. Langley, 2002: Psychological impact of fire disaster on 
children and their parents. Behavior Modification, 26, 163-
186.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0145445502026002003 
176.	 Mann, M.L., P. Berck, M.A. Moritz, E. Batllori, J.G. Bald­
win, C.K. Gately, and D.R. Cameron, 2014: Modeling resi­
dential development in California from 2000 to 2050: Inte­
grating wildfire risk, wildland and agricultural encroachment. 
Land Use Policy, 41, 438-452.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2014.06.020 
177.	 Thomas, D.S. and D.T. Butry, 2014: Areas of the U.S. 
wildland–urban interface threatened by wildfire during 
the 2001–2010 decade. Natural Hazards, 71, 1561-1585. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11069-013-0965-7 
178.	 Peters, M.P., L.R. Iverson, S.N. Matthews, and A.M. Prasad, 
2013: Wildfire hazard mapping: Exploring site conditions in 
eastern US wildland–urban interfaces. International Journal 
of Wildland Fire, 22, 567-578.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/
WF12177 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
127
179.	 Radeloff, V.C., R.B. Hammer, S.I. Stewart, J.S. Fried, S.S. 
Holcomb, and J.F. McKeefry, 2005: The wildland-urban 
interface in the United States. Ecological Applications, 15, 
799-805.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/04-1413 
180.	 Smith, H.G., G.J. Sheridan, P.N.J. Lane, P. Nyman, and 
S. Haydon, 2011: Wildfire effects on water quality in for­
est catchments: A review with implications for water sup­
ply. Journal of Hydrology, 396, 170-192.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2010.10.043 
181.	 Emelko, M.B., U. Silins, K.D. Bladon, and M. Stone, 
2011: Implications of land disturbance on drinking water 
treatability in a changing climate: Demonstrating the 
need for “source water supply and protection” strategies. 
Water Research, 45, 461-472.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2010.08.051 
182.	 Moody, J.A., R.A. Shakesby, P.R. Robichaud, S.H. Cannon, 
and D.A. Martin, 2013: Current research issues related to 
post-wildfire runoff and erosion processes. Earth-Science 
Reviews, 122, 10-37.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.earsci­
rev.2013.03.004 
183.	 Cannon, S.H., J.E. Gartner, R.C. Wilson, J.C. Bowers, and 
J.L. Laber, 2008: Storm rainfall conditions for floods and 
debris flows from recently burned areas in southwestern 
Colorado and southern California. Geomorphology, 96, 250-
269.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2007.03.019 
184.	 Cannon, S.H. and J. DeGraff, 2009: The increasing wild­
fire and post-fire debris-flow threat in western USA, and 
implications for consequences of climate change. Land­
slides – Disaster Risk Reduction. Sassa, K. and P. Canuti, Eds. 
Springer, Berlin, 177-190.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-540-69970-5_9 
185.	 Jordan, P., K. Turner, D. Nicol, and D. Boyer, 2006: Devel­
oping a risk analysis procedure for post-wildfire mass move­
ment and flooding in British Columbia. 1st Specialty Con­
ference on Disaster Medicine, May 23-26, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada. 
http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfd/pubs/rsi/fsp/Misc/
Misc071.pdf
186.	 Sham, C.H., M.E. Tuccillo, and J. Rooke, 2013: Effects 
of Wildfire on Drinking Water Utilities and Best Practices 
for Wildfire Risk Reduction and Mitigation. Web Report 
#4482, 119 pp. Water Research Foundation, Denver, CO. 
http://www.waterrf.org/publicreportlibrary/4482.pdf
187.	 USGS, 2012: Wildfire Effects on Source-Water Quality: 
Lessons from Fourmile Canyon Fire, Colorado, and Impli­
cations for Drinking-Water Treatment. U.S. Geological 
Survey Fact Sheet 2012-3095, 4 pp. http://pubs.usgs.gov/
fs/2012/3095/FS12-3095.pdf
188.	 Rhoades, C.C., D. Entwistle, and D. Butler, 2012: Water 
quality effects following a severe fire. Fire Management Today, 
72, (2):35-39.  http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fmt/fmt_pdfs/
FMT72-2.pdf
189.	 Ashley, W.S. and C.W. Gilson, 2009: A reassessment 
of U.S. lightning mortality. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 90, 1501-1518.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1175/2009bams2765.1 
190.	 Black, A.W. and W.S. Ashley, 2010: Nontornadic convec­
tive wind fatalities in the United States. Natural Hazards, 54, 
355-366.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11069-009-9472-2 
191.	 Schmidlin, T.W., 2009: Human fatalities from wind-related 
tree failures in the United States, 1995–2007. Natural Haz­
ards, 50, 13-25.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11069-008-
9314-7 
192.	 Ashley, W.S. and T.L. Mote, 2005: Derecho hazards in the 
United States. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 
86, 1577-1592.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-86-11-
1577 
193.	 Jahromi, A.H., R. Wigle, and A.M. Youssef, 2011: Are we 
prepared yet for the extremes of weather changes? Emergence 
of several severe frostbite cases in Louisiana. The American 
Surgeon, 77, 1712-1713.  
194.	 Lim, C. and J. Duflou, 2008: Hypothermia fatalities in a 
temperate climate: Sydney, Australia. Pathology, 40, 46-51. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00313020701716466 
195.	 Ramin, B. and T. Svoboda, 2009: Health of the homeless 
and climate change. Journal of Urban Health, 86, 654-664. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11524-009-9354-7 
196.	 Liddell, C. and C. Morris, 2010: Fuel poverty and human 
health: A review of recent evidence. Energy Policy, 38, 2987-
2997.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.01.037 
197.	 Bhattacharya, J., T. DeLeire, S. Haider, and J. Currie, 2003: 
Heat or eat? Cold-weather shocks and nutrition in poor 
american families. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 
1149-1154.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.93.7.1149 

4–IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS ON HUMAN HEALTH
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
128
198.	 Dey, A.N., P. Hicks, S. Benoit, and J.I. Tokars, 2010: Auto­
mated monitoring of clusters of falls associated with severe 
winter weather using the BioSense system. Injury Prevention, 
16, 403-407.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ip.2009.025841 
199.	 Eisenberg, D. and K.E. Warner, 2005: Effects of snowfalls 
on motor vehicle collisions, injuries, and fatalities. Ameri­
can Journal of Public Health, 95, 120-124.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.2004.048926 
200.	 Fayard, G.M., 2009: Fatal work injuries involving natural 
disasters, 1992–2006. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 3, 201-209.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
DMP.0b013e3181b65895 
201.	 Adams, Z.W., J.A. Sumner, C.K. Danielson, J.L. McCau­
ley, H.S. Resnick, K. Grös, L.A. Paul, K.E. Welsh, and K.J. 
Ruggiero, 2014: Prevalence and predictors of PTSD and 
depression among adolescent victims of the Spring 2011 tor­
nado outbreak. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 55, 
1047-1055.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12220 
202.	 Conlon, K.C., N.B. Rajkovich, J.L. White-Newsome, L. 
Larsen, and M.S. O’Neill, 2011: Preventing cold-related 
morbidity and mortality in a changing climate. Maturi­
tas, 69, 197-202.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.maturi­
tas.2011.04.004 
203.	 Bowles, D.C., C.D. Butler, and S. Friel, 2014: Climate 
change and health in Earth’s future. Earth’s Future, 2, 60-67. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2013ef000177 
204.	 NOAA, 2015: Natural Hazard Statistics: Weather Fatalities. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Nation­
al Weather Service, Office of Climate, Water, and Weather 
Services. www.nws.noaa.gov/om/hazstats.shtml
205.	 Smith, A.B. and R.W. Katz, 2013: US billion-dollar weath­
er and climate disasters: Data sources, trends, accuracy 
and biases. Natural Hazards, 67, 387-410.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-013-0566-5 
206.	 Barbero, R., J.T. Abatzoglou, N.K. Larkin, C.A. Kolden, and 
B. Stocks, 2015: Climate change presents increased potential 
for very large fires in the contiguous United States. Interna­
tional Journal of Wildland Fire.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/
WF15083 
End

VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
5
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
U.S. Global Change Research Program
*Chapter Coordinator
Recommended Citation: Beard, C.B., R.J. Eisen, C.M. Barker, J.F. Garofalo, M. Hahn, M. Hayden, A.J. Monaghan, N.H. Ogden, and P.J. 
Schramm, 2016: Ch. 5: Vectorborne Diseases. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific 
Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 129–156. http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0765C7V 
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
Lead Authors
Charles B. Beard
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Rebecca J. Eisen
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Contributing Authors
Christopher M. Barker
University of California, Davis 
Jada F. Garofalo*
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Micah Hahn
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Mary Hayden
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Andrew J. Monaghan
National Center for Atmospheric Research
Nicholas H. Ogden
Public Health Agency of Canada
Paul J. Schramm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

130
VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
5
Key Findings 
Changing Distributions of Vectors and Vector-Borne Diseases
Key Finding 1: Climate change is expected to alter the geographic and seasonal distributions of existing 
vectors and vector-borne diseases [Likely, High Confidence].
Earlier Tick Activity and Northward Range Expansion
Key Finding 2: Ticks capable of carrying the bacteria that cause Lyme disease and other pathogens will 
show earlier seasonal activity and a generally northward expansion in response to increasing temperatures 
associated with climate change [Likely, High Confidence]. Longer seasonal activity and expanding 
geographic range of these ticks will increase the risk of human exposure to ticks [Likely, Medium 
Confidence].
Changing Mosquito-Borne Disease Dynamics
Key Finding 3: Rising temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, and a higher frequency of some extreme 
weather events associated with climate change will influence the distribution, abundance, and prevalence of 
infection in the mosquitoes that transmit West Nile virus and other pathogens by altering habitat availability 
and mosquito and viral reproduction rates [Very Likely, High Confidence]. Alterations in the distribution, 
abundance, and infection rate of mosquitoes will influence human exposure to bites from infected 
mosquitoes, which is expected to alter risk for human disease [Very Likely, Medium Confidence].
Emergence of New Vector-Borne Pathogens 
Key Finding 4: Vector-borne pathogens are expected to emerge or reemerge due to the interactions of climate 
factors with many other drivers, such as changing land-use patterns [Likely, High Confidence]. The impacts 
to human disease, however, will be limited by the adaptive capacity of human populations, such as vector 
control practices or personal protective measures [Likely, High Confidence].

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
131
5.1	 Introduction  
Vector-borne diseases are illnesses that are transmitted by vec­
tors, which include mosquitoes, ticks, and fleas. These vectors 
can carry infective pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, and 
protozoa, which can be transferred from one host (carrier) to an­
other. In the United States, there are currently 14 vector-borne 
diseases that are of national public health concern. These 
diseases account for a significant number of human illnesses 
and deaths each year and are required to be reported to the Na­
tional Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System at the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In 2013, state and local 
health departments reported 51,258 vector-borne disease cases 
to the CDC (Table 1).
The seasonality, distribution, and prevalence of vector-borne 
diseases are influenced significantly by climate factors, pri­
marily high and low temperature extremes and precipitation 
patterns.11 Climate change can result in modified weather pat­
terns and an increase in extreme events (see Ch. 1: Introduc­
tion) that can affect disease outbreaks by altering biological 
variables such as vector population size and density, vector 
survival rates, the relative abundance of disease-carrying 
animal (zoonotic) reservoir hosts, and pathogen reproduc­
tion rates. Collectively, these changes may contribute to an 
increase in the risk of the pathogen being carried to humans.
Climate change is likely to have both short- and long-term 
effects on vector-borne disease transmission and infection 
patterns, affecting both seasonal risk and broad geographic 
changes in disease occurrence over decades. However, models 
for predicting the effects of climate change on vector-borne 
diseases are subject to a high degree of uncertainty, largely 
due to two factors: 1) vector-borne diseases are maintained 
in nature in complex transmission cycles that involve vectors, 
other intermediate zoonotic hosts, and humans; and 2) there 
are a number of other significant social and environmental 
drivers of vector-borne disease transmission in addition to cli­
Summary of Reported Case Counts of Notifiablea Vector-Borne Diseases in the 
United States. 
Diseases
2013 Reported Cases
Median (range) 2004–2013b
Tick-Borne 
   Lyme disease
36,307
30,495 (19,804–38,468)
   Spotted Fever Rickettsia 
3,359
2,255 (1,713–4,470)
   Anaplasmosis/Ehrlichiosis
4,551
2,187 (875–4,551)
   Babesiosisb 
1,792
1,128 (940–1,792)
   Tularemia
203
136 (93–203)
   Powassan 
15
7 (1–16)
Mosquito-Borne
   West Nile virus
2,469
1,913 (712–5,673)
   Malariac 
1,594
1,484 (1,255–1,773)
   Dengueb,c 
843
624 (254–843)
   California serogroup viruses
112
78 (55–137)
   Eastern equine encephalitis
8
7 (4–21)
   St. Louis encephalitis
1
10 (1–13)
Flea-Borne 
   Plague 
4
4 (2–17)
a State Health Departments are required by law to report regular, frequent, and timely information about individual 
cases to the CDC in order to assist in the prevention and control of diseases. Case counts are summarized based 
on annual reports of nationally notifiable infectious diseases.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
b Babesiosis and dengue were added to the list of nationally notifiable diseases in 2011 and 2009, respectively. 
Median and range values encompass cases reported from 2011 to 2013 for babesiosis and from 2010 to 2013 
for dengue.
c Primarily acquired outside of the United States and based on travel-related exposures.
Table 1: Vectors and hosts involved in the transmission of these infective pathogens are sensitive to climate change and other 
environmental factors which, together, affect vector-borne diseases by influencing one or more of the following: vector and host 
survival, reproduction, development, activity, distribution, and abundance; pathogen development, replication, maintenance, and 
transmission; geographic range of pathogens, vectors, and hosts; human behavior; and disease outbreak frequency, onset, and 
distribution.11 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
132
mate change. For example, while climate variability and climate 
change both alter the transmission of vector-borne diseases, 
they will likely interact with many other factors, including how 
pathogens adapt and change, the availability of hosts, chang­
ing ecosystems and land use, demographics, human behavior, 
and adaptive capacity.12, 13 These complex interactions make it 
difficult to predict the effects of climate change on vector-borne 
diseases.
The risk of introducing exotic pathogens and vectors not cur­
rently present in the United States, while likely to occur, is simi­
larly difficult to project quantitatively.14, 15, 16 In recent years, sev­
eral important vector-borne pathogens have been introduced 
or reintroduced into the United States. These include West 
Nile virus, dengue virus, and chikungunya virus. In the case of 
the 2009 dengue outbreak in southern Florida, climate change 
was not responsible for the reintroduction of the virus in this 
area, which arrived via infected travelers from disease-endemic 
regions of the Caribbean.17 In fact, vector populations capable of 
transmitting dengue have been present for many years through­
out much of the southern United States, including Florida.18 
Climate change has the potential to increase human exposure 
risk or disease transmission following shifts in extended spring 
and summer seasons as dengue becomes more established in 
the United States. Climate change effects, however, are difficult 
to quantify due to the adaptive capacity of a population that 
may reduce exposure to vector-borne pathogens through such 
means as air conditioning, screens on windows, vector control 
and public health practices. 
This chapter presents case studies of Lyme disease and West 
Nile virus infection in relation to weather and climate. Although 
ticks and mosquitoes transmit multiple infectious pathogens 
to humans in the United States, Lyme disease and West Nile 
virus infection are the most commonly reported tick-borne and 
mosquito-borne diseases in this country (Table 1). In addition, a 
substantial number of studies have been conducted to eluci­
date the role of climate in the transmission of these infectious 
pathogens. These broad findings, together with the areas of 
uncertainty from these case studies, are generalizable to other 
vector-borne diseases.11 
5.2	 Lyme Disease
State of the Science
Lyme disease is a tick-borne bacterial disease that is endemic 
(commonly found) in parts of North America, Europe, and Asia. 
In the United States, Lyme disease is caused by the bacterium 
Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto (B. burgdorferi; one of the 
spiral-shaped bacteria known as spirochetes) and is the most 
commonly reported vector-borne illness. It is primarily transmit­
ted to humans in the eastern United States by the tick species 
Ixodes scapularis (formerly I. dammini), known as blacklegged 
ticks or deer ticks, and in the far western United States by I. 
pacificus, commonly known as western blacklegged ticks.19 Ill­
ness in humans typically presents with fever, headache, fatigue, 
and a characteristic skin rash called erythema migrans. If left 
untreated, infection can spread to joints, the heart, and the 
nervous system.20 Since 1991, when standardized surveillance 
and reporting of Lyme disease began in the United States, case 
counts have increased steadily.21 Since 2007, more than 25,000 
Lyme disease cases have been reported annually.22 The geo­
graphic distribution of the disease is limited to specific regions 
in the United States (Figure 2), transmission occurs seasonally, 
and year-to-year variation in case counts and in seasonal onset 
is considerable.20, 21, 23 Each of these observations suggest that 
geographic location and seasonal climate variability may play a 
significant role in determining when and where Lyme disease 
cases are most likely to occur.
Although the reported incidence of Lyme disease is greater 
in the eastern United States compared with the westernmost 
United States,20, 21 in both geographical regions, nymphs (small 
immature ticks) are believed to be the life stage that is most 
significant in pathogen transmission from infected hosts (pri­
marily rodents) to humans (Figure 2, Figure 3).24, 25 Throughout 
the United States, the majority of human cases report onset of 
clinical signs of infection during the months of June, July, and 
August. The summer is a period of parallel increased activity for 
both blacklegged and western blacklegged ticks in the nymphal 
life stage (the more infectious stage) and for human recreational 
activity outdoors.21, 25 
Infection rates in humans vary significantly from year to year. 
From 1992 to 2006, variation in case counts of Lyme disease 
was as high as 57% from one year to the next.21 Likewise, the 
precise week of onset of Lyme disease cases across states in the 
eastern United States, where Lyme disease is endemic, differed 
by as much as 10 weeks from 1992 to 2007. Much of this varia­
tion in timing of disease onset can be explained by geographic 
region (cases occurred earlier in warmer states in the mid-Atlan­
tic region compared with cooler states in the North); however, 
the annual variation of disease onset within regions was notable 
and linked to winter and spring climate variability (see "Annual 
and Seasonal Variation in Lyme Disease" on page 136).23 
The geographic and seasonal distributions of Lyme disease case 
occurrence are driven, in part, by the life cycle of vector ticks 
(Figure 3). Humans are only exposed to Lyme disease spiro­
chetes (B. burgdorferi) in locations where both the vector tick 
populations and the infection-causing spirochetes are present.27 
Within these locations, the potential for contracting Lyme 
disease depends on three key factors: 1) tick vector abundance 
(the density of host-seeking nymphs being particularly import­
ant), 2) prevalence of B. burgdorferi infection in ticks (the prev­
alence in nymphs being particularly important), and 3) contact 
frequency between infected ticks and humans.28 To varying 
degrees, climate change can affect all three of these factors.

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
133
Figure 1: This conceptual diagram illustrates the key pathways by which climate change influences human exposure to Lyme 
disease and the potential resulting health outcomes (center boxes). These exposure pathways exist within the context of other factors 
that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that influence vulnerability for individuals are 
shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. Key factors that influence vulnerability at 
larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and management, and institutions, are shown in the left box. All 
of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s vulnerability through changes in exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change. See Ch. 1: Introduction for more information.
Climate Change and Health—Lyme Disease
Figure 2: Maps show the reported cases of Lyme disease in 2001 and 2014 for the areas of the country where Lyme disease is 
most common (the Northeast and Upper Midwest). Both the distribution and the numbers of cases have increased. (Figure source: 
adapted from CDC 2015)26
Changes in Lyme Disease Case Report Distribution
2001
2014

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
134
The seasonal occurrence of Lyme disease cases is related, partially, to the timing of a blood meal (host-seeking 
activity) of ticks and the three-stage life cycle (larvae, nymph, and adult) of ticks.48 Increasing temperatures and the 
accompanying changes in seasonal patterns are expected to result in earlier seasonal tick activity and an expansion 
in tick habitat range, increasing the risk of human exposure to ticks.
For blacklegged ticks and western blacklegged ticks, spirochete transmission from adult ticks to eggs is rare or 
does not occur.49 Instead, immature ticks (larvae and nymphs) acquire infection-causing B. burgdorferi spirochetes 
by feeding on rodents, other small mammals, and birds during the spring and summer months. The spirochetes 
are maintained throughout the tick life cycle from larva to nymph and from nymph to adult. The spirochetes are 
primarily passed to humans from nymphs and less frequently by adults. 
Prevalence of B. burgdorferi infection in nymphal ticks depends in part on the structure of the host community.50, 
51 Larval ticks are more likely to be infected in areas where they feed mostly on animals that can carry and transmit 
the disease-causing bacteria (such as white-footed mice), compared with areas where they feed mostly on hosts 
that cannot become infected and thus do not pass on the bacteria (such as certain lizards). 
Natural variation in potential for rodents, birds, and reptiles to carry B. burgdorferi in the wild leads to large 
differences in infection rates in nymphal ticks, resulting in considerable geographic variation in the transmission 
cycles and in the opportunity for humans to contract Lyme disease.52 Unlike nymphal or larval ticks, adult ticks 
feed mainly during the cooler months of the year, and primarily on deer, which are resistant to B. burgdorferi 
infection and thus play little role in increasing the abundance of infected ticks in the population. However, deer are 
important for tick reproduction and therefore influence the abundance of nymphs in subsequent generations.19
Life Cycle of Blacklegged Ticks, Ixodes scapularis
Life Cycle of Blacklegged Ticks, Ixodes scapularis
Figure 3: Figure depicts the life cycle of blacklegged ticks, including the phases in which humans can be exposed to Lyme 
disease, and some of the changes in seasonality expected with climate change. (Figure source: adapted from CDC 2015)47

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
135
Aside from short periods of time when they are feeding on 
hosts (less than three weeks of their two- to three-year life 
cycle), ticks spend most of their lives off of hosts in various 
natural landscapes (such as woodlands or grasslands) where 
weather factors including temperature, precipitation, and 
humidity affect their survival and host-seeking behavior. In 
general, both low and high temperatures increase tick mor­
tality rates, although increasing humidity can increase their 
ability to tolerate higher temperatures.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 
Within areas where tick vector populations are present, some 
studies have demonstrated an association among tempera­
ture, humidity, and tick abundance.39, 40, 41 Factors that are less 
immediately dependent on climate (for example, landscape 
and the relative proportions within a community of zoonotic 
hosts that carry or do not carry Lyme disease-causing bacte­
ria) may be more important in smaller geographic areas.42, 
43 Temperature and humidity also influence the timing of 
host-seeking activity,32, 35, 36, 44 and can influence which seasons 
are of highest risk to the public. 
In summary, weather-related variables can determine geo­
graphic distributions of ticks and seasonal activity patterns. 
However, the importance of these weather variables in 
Lyme disease transmission to humans compared with other 
important predictors is likely scale-dependent. In general, 
across the entire country, climate-related variables often play 
a significant role in determining the occurrence of tick vectors 
and Lyme disease incidence in the United States (for exam­
ple, Lyme disease vectors are absent in the arid Intermoun­
tain West where climate conditions are not suitable for tick 
survival). However, within areas where conditions are suitable 
for tick survival, other variables (for example, landscape and 
the relative proportions within a community of zoonotic hosts 
that carry or do not carry Lyme disease-causing bacteria) are 
more important for determining tick abundance, infection 
rates in ticks, and ultimately human infection rates.39, 45, 46 
Observed Trends and Measures of Human Risk
Geographic Distribution of Ticks
Because the presence of tick vectors is required for B. burg­
dorferi transmission to humans, information on where vector 
tick species live provides basic information on where Lyme 
disease risk occurs. Minimum temperature appears to be a 
key variable in defining the geographic distribution of black­
legged ticks.39, 45, 53 Low minimum temperatures in winter may 
lead to environmental conditions that are unsuitable for tick 
population survival. The probability of a given geographic area 
being suitable for tick populations increases as minimum tem­
perature rises.45 In the case of the observed northward range 
expansion of blacklegged ticks into Canada, higher tempera­
tures appear to be a key factor affecting where, and how fast, 
ticks are colonizing new localities.54, 55, 56, 57, 58 
Maximum temperatures also significantly affect where 
blacklegged ticks live.39, 45 Higher temperatures increase tick 
development and hatching rates, but reduce tick survival and 
egg-laying (reproduction) success.30 
Declines in rainfall amount and humidity are also important in 
limiting the geographic distribution of blacklegged ticks. Ticks 
are more likely to reside in moister areas because increased 
humidity can increase tick survival.35, 38, 39, 45, 53, 55  
Geographic Distribution of Infected Ticks
Climate variables have been shown to be strong predictors 
of geographic locations in which blacklegged ticks reside, but 
less important for determining how many nymphs live in a 
given area or what proportion of those ticks is infected.39, 40 
The presence of uninfected nymphs and infected nymphs can 
vary widely over small geographic areas experiencing similar 
temperature and humidity conditions, which supports the hy­
pothesis that factors other than weather play a significant role 
in determining nymph survival and infection rates.37, 39, 40, 41, 44 
Additional studies that modeled nymphal density within small 
portions of the blacklegged tick range (north-central states 
and Hudson River Valley, NY), and modeling studies that in­
clude climate and other non-biological variables indicate only 
a weak relationship to nymphal density.59, 60 Nonetheless, cli­
mate variables can be used to model nymphal density in some 
instances. For example, in a single county in northern coastal 
California with strong climate gradients, warmer areas with 
less variation between maximum and minimum monthly wa­
ter vapor in the air were characteristic of areas with elevated 
concentrations of infected nymphs.41 However, it is likely that 
differences in animal host community structure, which vary 
with climatic conditions (for example, relative abundances of 
hosts that carry or do not carry Lyme disease-causing bacte­
ria), influenced the concentration of infected nymphs.37, 61 
In the eastern United States, Lyme disease is transmitted to
humans primarily by blacklegged (deer) ticks.

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
136
Geographic Distribution of Lyme Disease 
Though there are links between climate and tick distribution, 
studies that look for links between weather and geographical 
differences in human infection rates do not show a clear or con­
sistent link between temperature and Lyme disease incidence.46, 
62, 63 
Annual and Seasonal Variation in Lyme Disease 
Temperature and precipitation both influence the host-seeking 
activity of ticks, which may result in year-to-year variation in the 
number of new Lyme disease cases and the timing of the sea­
son in which Lyme disease infections occur. However, identified 
associations between precipitation and Lyme disease incidence, 
or temperature and Lyme disease incidence, are limited or 
weak.64, 65 Overall, the association between summer moisture 
and Lyme disease infection rates in humans remains inconsis­
tent across studies. 
The peak period when ticks are seeking hosts starts earlier in 
the warmer, more southern, states than in northern states.44 
Correspondingly, the onset of human Lyme disease cases occurs 
earlier as the growing degree days (a measurement of tempera­
ture thresholds that must be met for biological processes to 
occur) increases, yet, the timing of the end of the Lyme disease 
season does not appear to be determined by weather-related 
variables.23 Rather, the number of potential carriers (for exam­
ple, deer, birds, and humans) likely influences the timing of the 
end of the Lyme disease season.
The effects of temperature and humidity or precipitation on the 
seasonal activity patterns of nymphal western blacklegged ticks 
is more certain than the impacts of these factors on the timing 
of Lyme disease case occurrence.36, 37 Peak nymphal activity is 
generally reached earlier in hotter and drier areas, but lasts for 
shorter durations. Host-seeking activity ceases earlier in the 
season in cooler and more humid conditions. The density of 
nymphal western blacklegged ticks in north-coastal California 
consistently begins to decline when average daily maximum 
temperatures are between 70°F (21°C) and 73.5°F (23°C), and 
when average maximum daily relative humidity decreases 
below 83%–85%.36, 37
Projected Impacts
Warmer winter and spring temperatures are projected to lead 
to earlier annual onset of Lyme disease cases in the eastern 
United States (see “Research Highlight” below) and in an earlier 
onset of nymphal host-seeking behavior.66 Limited research 
shows that the geographic distribution of blacklegged ticks is 
expected to expand to higher latitudes and elevations in the 
future and retract in the southern United States.67 Declines in 
subfreezing temperatures at higher latitudes may be responsi­
ble for improved survival of ticks. In many woodlands, ticks can 
find refuge from far-subzero winter air temperatures in the sur­
face layers of the soil.68, 69 However, a possibly important impact 
of climate change will be acceleration of the tick life cycles due 
to higher temperatures during the spring, summer, and autumn, 
which would increase the likelihood that ticks survive to repro­
duce.58, 70 This prediction is consistent with recent observations 
of the spread of I. scapularis in Canada.55, 71 
Importance: Lyme disease occurrence is highly seasonal. The annual springtime onset of Lyme disease cases is 
regulated by climate variability in preceding months. Until now, the possible effects of climate change on the 
timing of Lyme disease infection in humans early and late in the 21st century have not been addressed for the 
United States, where Lyme disease is the most commonly reported vector-borne disease. 
Objectives: Examine the potential impacts of 21st century climate change on the timing of the beginning of the 
annual Lyme disease season (annual onset week) in the eastern United States.
Methods: Downscaled future climate projections for four greenhouse gas (GHG) concentration trajectories from five 
atmosphere–ocean global climate models (AOGCMs) are input to the national-level empirical model of Moore et al. 
(2014)23 to simulate the potential impact of 21st century climate change on the annual onset week of Lyme disease 
in the United States.23 The four GHG trajectories in order of lowest to highest concentrations are RCP2.6, RCP4.5, 
RCP6.0, and RCP8.5 (see Appendix 1: Technical Support Document).
Results: Historical and future projections for the beginning of the Lyme disease season are shown in Figure 4. 
Historical results are for the period 1992–2007, where the national-average peak onset date for Lyme disease 
occurs on week 21.2 of the calendar year (mid-May). Future projections are for two time periods: 1) 2025–2040 
and 2) 2065–2080. On average, the start of the Lyme disease season is projected to arrive a few days earlier 
for 2025–2040 (0.4–0.5 weeks), and approximately one to two weeks earlier for 2065–2080 (0.7–1.9 weeks) 
depending on the GHG trajectory. Winter and spring temperature increases are primarily responsible for the earlier 
peak onset of Lyme disease infections. 
Research Highlight: Lyme Disease

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
137
To project accurately the changes in Lyme disease risk in 
humans based on climate variability, long-term data collection 
on tick vector abundance and human infection case counts 
are needed to better understand the relationships between 
changing climate conditions, tick vector abundance, and Lyme 
disease case occurrence.
5.3	 West Nile Virus
State of the Science 
West Nile virus (WNV) is the leading cause of mosquito-borne 
disease in the United States. From 1999 to 2013, a total of 
39,557 cases of WNV disease were reported in the United 
States.73 Annual variation is substantial, both in terms of case 
counts and the geographic distribution of cases of human 
infection (Figure 5).73 Since the late summer of 1999, when 
an outbreak of WNV first occurred in New York City,74 human 
WNV cases have occurred in the United States every year. 
After the introduction of the virus to the United States, WNV 
spread westward, and by 2004 WNV activity was reported 
throughout the contiguous United States.75, 76 Annual human 
WNV incidence remained stable through 2007, decreased 
substantially through 2011, and increased again in 2012, rais­
ing questions about the factors driving year-to-year variation 
in disease transmission.75 The locations of annual WNV out­
breaks vary, but several states have reported consistently high 
rates of disease over the years, including Arizona, California, 
Colorado, Idaho, Illinois, Louisiana, New York, North Dakota, 
South Dakota, and Texas.73, 75
Research Highlight: Lyme Disease, continued
Projected Change in Lyme Disease Onset Week
Figure 4: Box plots comparing the distributions of the national-level historical observed data for annual Lyme disease onset 
week (1992–2007 in green) with the distributions of AOGCM multi-model mean projections of Lyme onset week for each of 
four Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5) and two future time periods (2025–2040 in blue, 
2065–2080 in red). Each box plot shows the values of Lyme disease onset week for the maximum (top of dashed line), 75th 
percentile (top of box), average (line through box), 25th percentile (bottom of box), and minimum (bottom of dashed line) of the 
distribution. All distributions are comprised of values for 12 eastern states and 16 years (N = 192). Additional details can be 
found in Monaghan et al. (2015). (Figure source: adapted from Monaghan et al. 2015).72
Conclusions: Results demonstrate that 21st century climate change will lead to environmental conditions suitable 
for earlier annual onset of Lyme disease cases in the United States, with possible implications for the timing of 
public health interventions. The end of the Lyme disease season is not strongly affected by climate variables; 
therefore, conclusions about the duration of the transmission season or changes in the annual number of new 
Lyme disease cases cannot be drawn from this study.

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
138
The majority (70% to 80%) of people infected with WNV do 
not show symptoms of the disease. Of those infected, 20% to 
30% develop acute systemic febrile illness, which may include 
headache, myalgias (muscle pains), rash, or gastrointestinal 
symptoms; fewer than 1% experience neuroinvasive disease, 
which may include meningitis (inflammation around the brain 
and spinal cord), encephalitis (inflammation of the brain), 
or myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) (see "5.4 Popu­
lations of Concern" on page 142).77 Because most infected 
persons are asymptomatic (showing no symptoms), there is 
significant under-reporting of cases.78, 79, 80 More than three 
million people were estimated to be infected with WNV in the 
United States from 1999 to 2010, resulting in about 780,000 
illnesses.77 However, only about 30,700 cases were reported 
during the same time span.73
West Nile virus is maintained in transmission cycles between 
birds (the natural hosts of the virus) and mosquitoes (Figure 
6). The number of birds and mosquitoes infected with WNV in­
creases as mosquitoes pass the virus from bird to bird starting 
in late winter or spring. Human infections can occur from a 
bite of a mosquito that has previously bitten an infected bird.81 
Humans do not pass on the virus to biting mosquitoes because 
they do not have sufficient concentrations of the virus in their 
bloodstreams.82, 83 In rare instances, WNV can be transmitted 
through blood transfusions or organ transplants.82, 84 Peak 
transmission of WNV to humans in the United States typically 
occurs between June and September, coinciding with the sum­
mer season when mosquitoes are most active and tempera­
tures are highest.85 
Incidence of West Nile Neuroinvasive Disease by County in the United States 
Figure 5: Maps show the incidence of West Nile neuroinvasive disease in the United States for 2010 through 2013. Shown as 
cases per 100,000 people. (Data source: CDC 2014)73

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
139
Observed Impacts and Indicators
Mosquito vectors and bird hosts are required for WNV to 
persist, and the dynamics of both are strongly affected by cli­
mate in a number of ways. Geographical variation in average 
climate constrains the ranges of both vectors and hosts, while 
shorter-term climate variability affects many aspects of vector 
and host population dynamics. Unlike ticks, mosquitoes have 
short life cycles and respond more quickly to climate drivers 
over relatively short timescales of days to weeks. Impacts on 
bird abundance are often realized over longer timescales of 
months to years due to impacts on annual reproduction and 
migration cycles. 
Climate Impacts on West Nile Virus Transmission
Figure 6: Climate Impacts on West Nile Virus Transmission

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
140
WNV has been detected in 65 mosquito species and more 
than 300 bird species in the United States,85 although only a 
relatively small number of these species contribute substan­
tively to human infections. Three Culex (Cx.) mosquito species 
are the primary vectors of the virus in different regions of the 
continental United States, and differences in their preferred 
breeding habitats mean that climate change will likely impact 
human WNV disease risk differently across these regions (Fig­
ure 5). Bird species that contribute to WNV transmission in­
clude those that develop sufficient viral concentrations in their 
blood to transmit the virus to feeding mosquitoes.86, 87 As with 
mosquitoes, the bird species involved in the transmission cycle 
are likely to respond differently to climate change, increasing 
the complexity of projecting future WNV risk. 
Impacts of Climate and Weather
Climate, or the long-term average weather, is important for 
defining WNV’s transmission range limits because extreme 
conditions—too cold, hot, wet, 
or dry—can alter mosquito and 
bird habitat availability, increase 
mortality in mosquitoes or birds, 
and/or disrupt viral transmission. 
WNV is an invasive pathogen that 
was first detected in the United 
States just over 15 years ago, 
which is long enough to observe 
responses of WNV to key weather variables, but not long 
enough to observe responses to climate change trends.
Climate change may influence mosquito survival rates through 
changes in season length, although mosquitoes are also able 
to adapt to changing conditions. For example, mosquitoes that 
transmit WNV are limited to latitudes and altitudes where 
winters are short enough for them to survive.88 However, 
newly emerged adult female mosquitoes have some ability to 
survive cold temperatures by entering a reproductive arrest 
called diapause as temperatures begin to cool and days grow 
shorter in late summer.89, 90 These females will not seek a 
blood meal until temperatures begin to warm the following 
year. Even during diapause, very harsh winters may reduce 
mosquito populations, as temperatures near freezing have 
been shown to kill diapausing Cx. tarsalis.91 
During the warmer parts of the year, Culex mosquitoes must 
have aquatic habitat available on a nearly continuous basis 
because their eggs hatch within a few days after they are laid 
and need moisture to remain viable. The breeding habitats of 
WNV vectors vary by species, ranging from fresh, sunlit water 
found in irrigated crops and wetlands preferred by Cx. tarsalis 
to stagnant, organically enriched water sources, such as urban 
storm drains, unmaintained swimming pools, or backyard con­
tainers, used by Cx. pipiens and Cx. quinquefasciatus.92, 93, 94
WNV has become endemic within a wide range of climates in 
the United States, but there is substantial geographic variation 
in the intensity of virus transmission. Part of this geographic 
variation can be attributed to the 
abundance and distributions of 
suitable bird hosts.95 Important 
hosts, such as robins, migrate 
annually between summer breed­
ing grounds and winter foraging 
areas.86, 96 Migrating birds have 
shown potential as a vehicle for 
long-range virus movement.97, 
98 Although the timing of migration is driven by climate, the 
impact of climate change-driven migration changes on WNV 
transmission have not yet been documented by scientists. Cli­
mate change has already begun to cause shifts in bird breed­
ing and migration patterns,99 but it is unknown how these 
changes may affect WNV transmission.
Temperature is the most studied climate driver of the dynam­
ics of WNV transmission. It is clear that warm temperatures 
accelerate virtually all of the biological processes that affect 
transmission: accelerating the mosquito life cycle,100, 101, 102, 
103, 104 increasing the mosquito biting rates that determine the 
frequency of contact between mosquitoes and hosts,105, 106 
and increasing viral replication rates inside the mosquito that 
decrease the time needed for a blood-fed mosquito to be able 
to pass on the virus.107, 108, 109 These relationships between in­
creasing temperatures and the biological processes that affect 
WNV transmission suggest a subsequent increase in risk of 
human disease.110, 111, 112, 113 However, results from models have 
suggested that extreme high temperatures combined with de­
creased precipitation may decrease mosquito populations.114
Precipitation can create aquatic breeding sites for WNV 
vectors,115, 116 and in some areas snowpack increases the 
amount of stored water available for urban or agricultural 
systems, which provide important habitat for WNV vectors,117, 
118 although effects depend on human water management 
Birds such as the house finch are the natural host of West Nile 
virus.
Climate change has already begun to cause 
shifts in bird breeding and migration 
patterns,but it is unknown how these changes 
may affect West Nile virus transmission.

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
141
Humans can be infected from a bite of a mosquito that has previously bitten an infected bird.
decisions and vary spatially.101 Droughts have been associated 
with increased WNV activity, but the association between 
decreased precipitation and WNV depends on location and 
the particular sequence of drought and wetting that precedes 
the WNV transmission season.119, 120, 121, 122
The impact of year-to-year changes in precipitation on mos­
quito populations varies among the regions of the United 
States and is affected by the typical climate of the area as well 
as other non-climate factors, such as land use or water infra­
structure and management practices. In the northern Great 
Plains—a hotspot for WNV activity—increased precipitation 
has been shown to lead to higher Cx. tarsalis abundance a 
few weeks later.116 In contrast, in the typically wet Pacific 
Northwest, weekly precipitation was found to be unrelated 
to subsequent mosquito abundance.123 In urban areas, larvae 
(aquatic immature mosquitoes) may be washed out of their 
underground breeding habitats by heavy rainfall events, mak­
ing drier conditions more favorable for WNV transmission.110, 
124, 125 In rural areas or drier regions, increased precipitation or 
agricultural irrigation may provide the moisture necessary for 
the development of breeding habitats.121 
Impacts of Long-Term Climate Trends
The relatively short period of WNV’s transmission in the Unit­
ed States prevents direct observation of the impacts of long-
term climate trends on WNV incidence. However, despite the 
short history of WNV in the United States, there are some 
lessons to be learned from other mosquito-borne diseases 
with longer histories in the United States. 
Western equine encephalomyelitis virus (WEEV) and St. Louis 
encephalitis virus (SLEV) were first identified in the 1930s and 
have been circulating in the United States since that time. 
Like WNV, both viruses are transmitted primarily by Culex 
mosquitoes and are climate-sensitive. WEEV outbreaks were 
associated with wet springs followed by warm summers.118, 
126 Outbreaks of SLEV were associated with hot, dry periods 
when urban mosquito production increased due to stagnation 
of water in underground systems or when cycles of drought 
and wetting set up more complex transmission dynamics.127, 128 
Despite climatic warming that would be expected to favor 
increased WEEV and SLEV transmission, both viruses have had 
sharply diminished incidence during the past 30 to 40 years.129, 
130 Although the exact reason for this decline is unknown, it is 
likely a result of non-climate factors, such as changes in hu­
man behavior or undetected aspects of viral evolution. Several 
other mosquito-borne pathogens, such as chikungunya and 
dengue, have grown in importance as global health threats 
during recent decades; however, a link to climate change in­
duced disease expansion in the United States has not yet been 
confirmed. These examples demonstrate the variable impact 
that climate change can have on different mosquito-borne 
diseases and help to explain why the direction of future trends 
in risk for WNV remain unclear. 
Projected Impacts
Given WNV’s relatively short history in the United States, the 
described geographic variation in climate responses, and the 
complexity of transmission cycles, projecting the future dis­
tribution of WNV under climate change remains a challenge. 
Despite the growing body of work examining the connections 
between WNV and weather, climate-based seasonal forecasts 
of WNV outbreak risk are not yet available at a national scale. 
Forecasting the annual presence of WNV disease on the basis 
of climate and other ecological factors has been attempted 
for U.S. counties, with general agreement between modeled 
expectations and observed data, but more quantitative predic­
tions of disease incidence or the risk for human exposure are 
needed.131 
Longer-term projections of WNV under climate change scenar­
ios are also rare. WNV is projected to increase in much of the 
northern and southeastern United States due to rising tempera­
tures and declining precipitation, respectively, with the poten­

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
142
tial for decreased occurrence across the central United States.132 
Future projections show that the season when mosquitoes are 
most abundant will begin earlier and end later, possibly result­
ing in fewer mosquitoes in mid-summer in southern locations 
where extreme heat is predicted to coincide with decreased 
summer precipitation.114
5.4	 Populations of Concern 
Climate change will influence human vulnerability to vec­
tor-borne disease by influencing the seasonality and the 
location of exposures to pathogens and vectors. These impacts 
may influence future disease patterns; certain vector-borne 
diseases may emerge in areas where they had previously not 
been observed and other diseases may become less common in 
areas where they had previously been very common. As such, 
some segments of the U.S. population may be disproportionate­
ly affected by, or exposed to, vector-borne diseases in response 
to climate change (see also Ch. 9: Populations of Concern).
In addition to climate factors, 
multiple non-climate factors also 
influence human exposure to 
vector-borne pathogens.17, 133, 134, 
135, 136, 137 Some of these include 
factors from an environmental or 
institutional context (Figure 1), 
such as pathogen adaptation and 
change, changes in vector and host population and composi­
tion, changes in pathogen infection rates, and vector control or 
other public health practices (pesticide applications, integrated 
vector management, vaccines, and other disease interven­
tions). Other non-climate factors that influence vulnerability to 
vector-borne disease include those from a social and behavioral 
context, such as outdoor activity, occupation, landscape design, 
proximity to vector habitat, and personal protective behav­
iors (applying repellents before spending time in tick habitat, 
performing tick checks, and bathing after being outdoors).138 
For Lyme disease, behavioral factors, especially the number of 
hours spent working or playing outdoors in tick habitat as well 
as proximity to dense shrubbery, can increase exposure to the 
ticks that transmit the bacteria that causes Lyme disease.139 For 
example, outdoor workers in the northeastern United States are 
at higher risk for contact with blacklegged ticks and, therefore, 
are at a greater risk for contracting Lyme disease.140, 141, 142 If 
outdoor workers are working in areas where there are infected 
mosquitoes, occupational exposures can also occur for WNV.143
Individual characteristics, such as age, gender, and immune 
function, may also affect vulnerability by influencing sus­
ceptibility to infection.21, 80, 140, 143, 144, 145 Lyme disease is more 
frequently reported in children between 5 and 9 years of age 
and in adults between the ages of 55 and 59,21 and advanced 
age and being male contribute to a higher risk for severe WNV 
infections.79, 144, 145
The impacts of climate change on human vulnerability to 
vector-borne disease may be minimized by individual- or 
community-level adaptive capacity, or the ability to reduce the 
potential exposures that may be caused by climate change. 
For example, socioeconomic status and domestic protective 
barriers, such as screens on windows and doors, can limit 
exposures to vector-borne pathogens.17, 134, 135, 136, 137 From 1980 
to 1999, the infected mosquito counts in Laredo, Texas, were 
significantly higher than in three adjoining Mexican states—
yet, while there were only 64 cases of dengue fever reported 
in Texas, more than 62,000 dengue fever cases were reported 
in the Mexican states.137 In Texas, socioeconomic factors and 
adaptive measures, including houses with air conditioning and 
intact screens, contributed to the significantly lower dengue 
incidence by reducing human–mosquito contact.137 The adap­
tive capacity of a population may augment or limit the impacts 
of climate change to human vulnerability for vector-borne 
disease.137 
Climate factors are useful bench­
marks to indicate seasonal risk 
and broad geographic changes in 
disease occurrence over de­
cades. However, human vulner­
ability to vector-borne disease 
is more holistically evaluated by 
examining climate factors with 
non-climate factors (environmental or institutional context, 
social and behavioral context, and individual characteristics). 
Ultimately, a community’s capacity to adapt to both the 
climate and non-climate factors will affect population vulnera­
bility to vector-borne disease. 
5.5	 Emerging Issues 
Some vector-borne diseases may be introduced or become 
re-established in the United States by a variety of mecha­
nisms. In conjunction with trade and travel, climate change 
may contribute by creating habitats suitable for the establish­
ment of disease-carrying vectors or for locally sustained trans­
mission of vector-borne pathogens. Examples of emerging vec­
tor-borne diseases in the United States include the West Nile 
virus introduction described above, recent outbreaks of locally 
acquired dengue in Florida17, 146 and southern Texas,147 and chi­
kungunya cases in the Caribbean and southern Florida,148 all of 
which have raised public health concern about emergence and 
re-emergence of these mosquito-borne diseases in the United 
States. Collecting data on the spread of disease-causing insect 
vectors and the viruses that cause dengue and chikungunya is 
critical to understanding and predicting the threat of emer­
gence or reemergence of these diseases. Understanding the 
role of climate change in disease emergence and reemergence 
would also require additional research. 
Some segments of the U.S. population may 
be disproportionately affected by, or exposed 
to, vector-borne diseases in response to 
climate change.

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
143
5.6	 Research Needs
In addition to the emerging issues identified above, and based 
on their review of the literature, the authors highlight the 
following areas for potential scientific research activity on 
vector-borne disease. Climate and non-climate factors interact 
to determine the burden of vector-borne diseases on hu­
mans, but the mechanisms of these processes are still poorly 
understood.149 Evidence-based models that include vector–
host interaction, host immunity, pathogen evolution, and land 
use, as well as socioeconomic drivers of transmission, human 
behavior, and adaptive capacity are needed to facilitate a 
better understanding of the mechanisms by which climate and 
non-climate factors drive vector-borne disease emergence. 
Socioeconomic and human behavioral factors, in particular, 
appear to limit vector-borne diseases, even in neighboring cit­
ies.136, 137 This is a fertile area for future research, and one that 
is particularly relevant for increasing our adaptive capacity to 
address future vector-borne disease threats.
Numerous studies have identified associations between 
vector-borne diseases and weather or climate, but most have 
focused on risk mapping or estimating associations of broad 
aggregates of temperature and precipitation with disease-re­
lated outcomes. A move beyond correlative associations to 
a more mechanistic understanding of climate’s impacts on 
the discrete events that give rise to transmission is needed. 
Models must also be accompanied by empirical research to 
inform their parameters. Climate effects are complex, and 
models frequently borrow information across vector species 
and pathogens or make simplifying assumptions that can lead 
to incorrect conclusions.150 
The risk for vector-borne diseases is highly variable geograph­
ically and over time. Monitoring responses of pathogens to 
climate change at a continental scale requires coordinated, 
systematically collected long-term surveillance datasets to 
document changes in vector occurrence, abundance, and 
infection rates. Collecting these data will provide a clearer 
understanding of how external drivers work in conjunction 
with climate change to determine the risk for human exposure 
to vector-borne disease. 
Future assessments can benefit from research activities that:
•	 evaluate how climatic variables, socioeconomic factors, and 
human behavior influence vector-borne disease occurrence 
and are expected to affect human adaptive capacity and the 
ability to respond to future disease threats;
•	 enhance long-term, systematic data collection on vector and 
pathogen distributions to detect changes over time. Such 
datasets must span a range of land-use types, including 
urban areas, and should be coupled with data on human 
disease;
•	 utilize mechanistic models that provide an evidence-based 
view of climate’s impacts on vector-borne diseases by ex­
plicitly accounting for the series of discrete but intertwined 
events that give rise to transmission. Models should be sup­
ported and validated by data specific to the disease system 
and include a realistic assessment of parameter uncertainty 
and variability;
•	 study the natural maintenance cycles of vector-borne patho­
gen evolution, emergence, and transmission as well as how 
climatic variables influence these cycles.

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
144
Supporting Evidence
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING CHAPTER
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. The authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the 
overall report process, see Appendices 2 and 3.
The approach and organization of this chapter was decided 
after conducting a comprehensive literature review. Two 
case studies, Lyme disease and West Nile virus, were chosen 
as representative examples of vector-borne diseases in 
the United States for this chapter because of their high 
incidence rates and the body of literature available on the 
association between climatic and meteorological variables 
and occurrence of these diseases. 
Regarding human outcomes related to vector-borne diseases, 
there is a much greater volume of published literature 
available on meteorological and climatic influences on 
vectors. As a result, our certainty in how climate change is 
likely to influence the vectors far exceeds our certainty in how 
changing climatic conditions are likely to affect when, where, 
and how many cases of vector-borne diseases are likely to 
occur.
Although the topic of zoonotic diseases was included in 
the original prospectus, it was later removed due to space 
constraints. Additionally, since both West Nile virus infection 
and Lyme disease are zoonotic diseases, these case studies 
address concepts that are common to both vector-borne and 
zoonotic diseases. 
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Changing Distributions of Vectors and Vector-Borne 
Diseases
Key Finding 1: Climate change is expected to alter the 
geographic and seasonal distributions of existing vectors and 
vector-borne diseases [Likely, High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
Vector-borne diseases result from complex interactions 
involving vectors, reservoirs, humans, and both climate and 
non-climate factors. Numerous studies explain how climate 
variables influence the relationships between vectors, 
animal reservoirs, humans, and other non-climate factors to 
ultimately influence the spatial and temporal distribution of 
vector-borne disease.11, 39, 45, 53, 101, 104, 114, 116, 123, 135
Major uncertainties
It is certain that climate change will alter the geographic 
and seasonal distribution of existing vectors, pathogens, and 
reservoirs; the influence of climate change on the timing, 
prevalence, and location of specific vector-borne disease 
outbreaks is likely to vary depending on the influence of other 
significant non-climate drivers of disease occurrence.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence that climate change will influence 
the temporal and spatial distributions of vectors, pathogens, 
and animal reservoirs, there is high confidence that climate 
change is likely to alter the geographic and seasonal 
distributions of vectors and vector-borne diseases.
Earlier Tick Activity and Northward Range Expansion
Key Finding 2: Ticks capable of carrying the bacteria that 
cause Lyme disease and other pathogens will show earlier 
seasonal activity and a generally northward expansion in 
response to increasing temperatures associated with climate 
change [Likely, High Confidence]. Longer seasonal activity and 
expanding geographic range of these ticks will increase the 
risk of human exposure to ticks [Likely, Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
There is strong evidence that temperature affects the 
geographical distribution of ticks,39, 45, 53, 67 the timing of host-
seeking activity of ticks,36, 37, 44 and even the timing of Lyme 
disease case occurrence.23 However, the abundance of ticks 
infected with Lyme disease spirochetes, which is considered 
a better predictor of human risk for Lyme disease compared 
with nymphal density alone, has rarely been found to be 
strongly associated with meteorological variables.41 Studies 
aimed at identifying meteorological variables associated 
with the geographical distribution of human Lyme disease 
vary in their support for demonstrating positive associations 
between temperature and Lyme disease.46, 62, 63
Major uncertainties
While the effects of temperature, precipitation, and humidity 
on the spatial distribution of ticks and the timing of their 
host-seeking activity have been clearly established in both 
the eastern and western regions of the United States, where 
Lyme disease is common, the degree to which climate change 
will alter Lyme disease incidence remains uncertain. The 
observation that meteorological variables play a lesser role 
than other variables in predicting the density of nymphs 
infected with Lyme disease bacteria raises uncertainty in how 
climate change will affect the distribution and magnitude of 
Lyme disease incidence. This uncertainty is reflected in results 
from models aiming to associate meteorological variables with 
Lyme disease incidence that yielded inconsistent findings.46, 62, 63

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
145
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is high confidence that climate 
change, especially temperature change, is likely to cause 
shifts in the geographical distribution of ticks capable of 
carrying B. burgdorferi to more northern latitudes, the timing 
of host-seeking activity of ticks, and the timing of Lyme 
disease case occurrence. While these changes are likely to 
influence human disease, due to the few sources with limited 
consistency, incomplete models with methods still emerging, 
and some competing schools of thought, there is medium 
confidence surrounding how, and how much, climate change 
will influence the risk of human exposure to ticks carrying B. 
burgdorferi. 
Changing Mosquito-Borne Disease Dynamics
Key Finding 3: Rising temperatures, changing precipitation 
patterns, and a higher frequency of some extreme weather 
events associated with climate change will influence the 
distribution, abundance, and prevalence of infection in 
the mosquitoes that transmit West Nile virus and other 
pathogens by altering habitat availability and mosquito 
and viral reproduction rates [Very Likely, High Confidence]. 
Alterations in the distribution, abundance, and infection 
rate of mosquitoes will influence human exposure to bites 
from infected mosquitoes, which is expected to alter risk for 
human disease [Very Likely, Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
Higher temperatures affect the West Nile virus (WNV) 
system by accelerating mosquito development102, 104 and virus 
reproduction rates,101, 107, 108, 109 increasing egg-laying and biting 
frequency,106 and affecting mosquito survival.102, 126 Increased 
WNV activity has been associated with warm temperatures, 
mild winters, and drought.101, 110, 116 Very few studies have 
used climate variables to predict the occurrence of human 
WNV cases in the United States in response to climate change 
(for example, Harrigan et al. 2014),132 but available results 
suggest that areas of WNV transmission will expand in the 
northern latitudes and higher elevations driven by increasing 
temperature, while WNV transmission may decrease in the 
South if increasing temperatures reduce mosquito survival 
or limit availability of surface water, such as that provided by 
agricultural irrigation.
Major uncertainties
While the influence of temperature and precipitation on 
mosquito and WNV biology are fairly well-understood, these 
relationships vary across the United States depending on 
the local mosquito vector species, land use, and human 
activity.112, 121 For mosquitoes in urban areas, droughts 
may lead to stagnation of water and increased mosquito 
populations that enhance WNV transmission,110, 125 while in 
rural or agricultural areas, droughts may reduce mosquito 
populations by reducing available mosquito habitat for 
breeding,101 except when irrigation compensates for drought 
conditions.121 Long-term projections of human WNV risk 
under climate change scenarios are still in the early stages 
of development and are impeded by the complexities 
of the disease transmission cycle. Evolution of the virus, 
improvements in mosquito control, and the potential for long-
term changes in human behavior that may affect exposure to 
WNV are key sources of uncertainty. For this reason, short-
term, seasonal forecasts of WNV may be more fruitful in the 
near term and may provide information for seasonal resource 
allocation and public health planning. 
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is high confidence that climate 
change is very likely to influence mosquito distribution, 
abundance, and infection prevalence by altering habitat 
availability and mosquito and viral reproduction rates. While 
this is very likely to influence human disease, due to the few 
sources with limited consistency, incomplete models with 
methods still emerging, and some competing schools of 
thought, there is medium confidence surrounding how, and 
how much, climate change will influence human incidence of 
disease.
Emergence of New Vector-Borne Pathogens 
Key Finding 4: Vector-borne pathogens are expected to 
emerge or reemerge due to the interactions of climate factors 
with many other drivers, such as changing land-use patterns 
[Likely, High Confidence]. The impacts to human disease, 
however, will be limited by the adaptive capacity of human 
populations, such as vector control practices or personal 
protective measures [Likely, High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The literature shows that climate change must be considered 
together with the many other non-climate factors of disease 
emergence11, 12 and the availability of other mitigating factors, 
such as air conditioning, screens on windows, and vector 
control practices,17, 134, 136, 137 in order to appropriately quantify 
the impact climate has on the risk of emerging or reemerging 
exotic pathogens and vectors.
Major uncertainties
It remains uncertain how climate interacts as a driver with 
travel-related exposures and evolutionary adaptation of 
invasive vectors and pathogens to affect human disease. 
Improved longitudinal datasets and empirical models that 
include vector–host interaction, host immunity, and pathogen 
evolution as well as socioeconomic drivers of transmission 
are needed to address these knowledge gaps in research on 
climate sensitive diseases.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is high confidence that a 
multitude of interacting factors, one of which being climate 
change, will likely influence the emergence or reemergence 
of vector-borne pathogens to the United States. Additionally, 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
146
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10
there is high confidence that the influence of climate change 
on human disease is likely to be limited by the adaptive 
capacity of a population. 
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
See Appendix 4: Documenting Uncertainty for more 
information on assessments of confidence and likelihood used 
in this report. 
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 129–Mosquito: ©CDC/Science Faction/Corbis
Pg. 130–Woman applying repellent: © iStockPhoto.com/
powerofforever
Pg. 135–Blacklegged tick: ©Science Stills/ARS/Visuals 
Unlimited/Corbis
Pg. 140–House finch: ©Pete Oxford/Minden Pictures/Corbis
Pg. 141–Mosquito warning sign: © iStockPhotos.com/leekris
Pg. 141–Mosquito: ©CDC/Science Faction/Corbis

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
147
References
1.	
CDC, 2005: Notice to readers: Final 2004 reports of Noti­
fiable Diseases. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 54, 770-780.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5431a4.htm
2.	
CDC, 2006: Notice to readers: Final 2005 Reports of Noti­
fiable Diseases. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 55, 880-881.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5532a4.htm
3.	
CDC, 2007: Notice to readers: Final 2006 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 56, 853-863.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5633a4.htm
4.	
CDC, 2008: Notice to readers: Final 2007 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 57, 901,903-913.  http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5733a6.htm
5.	
CDC, 2009: Notice to readers: Final 2008 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 58, 856-869.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5831a5.htm
6.	
CDC, 2010: Notice to readers: Final 2009 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbidi­
ty and Mortality Weekly Report, 59, 1027-1039.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5932a5.htm?s_
cid=mm5932a5_w
7.	
CDC, 2011: Notice to readers: Final 2010 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbidi­
ty and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 1088-1101.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6032a5.htm?s_
cid=mm6032a5_w
8.	
CDC, 2012: Notice to readers: Final 2011 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 61, 624-637.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6132a8.htm?s_
cid=mm6132a8_w
9.	
CDC, 2013: Notice to readers: Final 2012 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 62, 669-682.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6233a6.htm?s_
cid=mm6233a6_w
10.	 CDC, 2014: Notice to readers: Final 2013 Reports of 
Nationally Notifiable Infectious Diseases. MMWR. Morbid­
ity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 702-715.  http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6332a6.htm?s_
cid=mm6332a6_w
11.	 Gage, K.L., T.R. Burkot, R.J. Eisen, and E.B. Hayes, 2008: 
Climate and vector-borne diseases. American Journal of Pre­
ventive Medicine, 35, 436-450.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2008.08.030 
12.	 IOM, 2003: Microbial Threats to Health: Emergence, Detec­
tion, and Response. Smolinski, M.S., M.A. Hamburg, and 
J. Lederberg, Eds. Institute of Medicine. The National Acad­
emies Press, Washington, D.C., 398 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.17226/10636 
13.	 Allan, B.F., F. Keesing, and R.S. Ostfeld, 2003: Effect of 
forest fragmentation on Lyme disease risk. Conservation 
Biology, 17, 267-272.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-
1739.2003.01260.x 
14.	 Jones, K.E., N.G. Patel, M.A. Levy, A. Storeygard, D. Balk, 
J.L. Gittleman, and P. Daszak, 2008: Global trends in emerg­
ing infectious diseases. Nature, 451, 990-993.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nature06536 
15.	 Rosenberg, R., M.A. Johansson, A.M. Powers, and B.R. 
Miller, 2013: Search strategy has influenced the discovery 
rate of human viruses. PNAS, 110, 13961-13964.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1307243110 
16.	 Kilpatrick, A.M. and S.E. Randolph, 2012: Drivers, dynam­
ics, and control of emerging vector-borne zoonotic diseases. 
Lancet, 380, 1946-1955.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-
6736(12)61151-9 
17.	 Radke, E.G., C.J. Gregory, K.W. Kintziger, E.K. Saub­
er-Schatz, E. Hunsperger, G.R. Gallagher, J.M. Barber, B.J. 
Biggerstaff, D.R. Stanek, K.M. Tomashek, and C.G.M. 
Blackmore, 2012: Dengue outbreak in Key West, Flori­
da, USA, 2009. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 18, 135-137. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1801.110130 
18.	 Dick, O.B., J.L. San Martín, R.H. Montoya, J. del Diego, B. 
Zambrano, and G.H. Dayan, 2012: The history of dengue 
outbreaks in the Americas. American Journal of Tropical Med­
icine and Hygiene, 87, 584-593.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/
ajtmh.2012.11-0770 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
148
19.	 Lane, R.S., J. Piesman, and W. Burgdorfer, 1991: Lyme 
borreliosis: Relation of its causative agent to its vectors and 
hosts in North America and Europe. Annual Review of Ento­
mology, 36, 587-609.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
en.36.010191.003103 
20.	 Mead, P.S., 2015: Epidemiology of Lyme disease. Infectious 
Disease Clinics of North America, 29, 187-210.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.idc.2015.02.010 
21.	 Bacon, R.M., K.J. Kugeler, and P.S. Mead, 2008: Surveil­
lance for Lyme disease--United States, 1992-2006. MMWR 
Surveillance Summaries, 57(SS10), 1-9.  http://www.cdc.
gov/MMWR/PREVIEW/MMWRHTML/ss5710a1.htm
22.	 CDC, 2015: Reported Cases of Lyme Disease by Year, Unit­
ed States, 1995-2013. Centers for Disease Control and Pre­
vention, Atlanta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/chart­
stables/casesbyyear.html
23.	 Moore, S.M., R.J. Eisen, A. Monaghan, and P. Mead, 2014: 
Meteorological influences on the seasonality of Lyme disease 
in the United States. American Journal of Tropical Medicine 
and Hygiene, 90, 486-496.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajt­
mh.13-0180 
24.	 Clover, J.R. and R.S. Lane, 1995: Evidence implicating 
nymphal Ixodes pacificus (Acari, ixodidae) in the epidemiol­
ogy of Lyme disease in California. American Journal of Tropi­
cal Medicine and Hygiene, 53, 237-240.  
25.	 Piesman, J., 1989: Transmission of Lyme disease spirochetes 
(Borrelia-Burgdorferi). Experimental & Applied Acarology, 7, 
71-80.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/Bf01200454 
26.	 CDC, 2015: Lyme Disease: Data and Statistics: Maps- 
Reported Cases of Lyme Disease – United States, 2001-
2014. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://
www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/
27.	 Dennis, D.T., T.S. Nekomoto, J.C. Victor, W.S. Paul, and 
J. Piesman, 1998: Forum: Reported distribution of Ixo­
des scapularis and in Ixodes pacificus (Acari: Ixodidae) in the 
United States. Journal of Medical Entomology, 35, 629-638. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/35.5.629 
28.	 Pepin, K.M., R.J. Eisen, P.S. Mead, J. Piesman, D. Fish, A.G. 
Hoen, A.G. Barbour, S. Hamer, and M.A. Diuk-Wasser, 2012: 
Geographic variation in the relationship between human 
Lyme disease incidence and density of infected host-seeking 
Ixodes scapularis nymphs in the eastern United States. American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 86, 1062-1071. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-0630 
29.	 Yuval, B. and A. Spielman, 1990: Duration and regulation of 
the developmental cycle of Ixodes dammini (Acari: Ixodidae). 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 27, 196-201.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jmedent/27.2.196 
30.	 Needham, G.R. and P.D. Teel, 1991: Off-host physio­
logical ecology of ixodid ticks. Annual Review of Entomol­
ogy, 36, 659-681.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
en.36.010191.003303 
31.	 Stafford III, K.C., 1994: Survival of immature Ixodes scapu­
laris (Acari: Ixodidae) at different relative humidities. Jour­
nal of Medical Entomology, 31, 310-314.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jmedent/31.2.310 
32.	 Lane, R.S., J.E. Kleinjan, and G.B. Schoeler, 1995: Diel 
activity of nymphal Dermacentor occidentalis and Ixodes 
pacificus (Acari: Ixodidae) in relation to meteorological factors 
and host activity periods. Journal of Medical Entomology, 32, 
290-299.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/32.3.290 
33.	 Bertrand, M.R. and M.L. Wilson, 1996: Microclimate-de­
pendent survival of unfed adult Ixodes scapularis (Acari: 
Ixodidae) in nature: Life cycle and study design implications. 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 33, 619-627.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jmedent/33.4.619 
34.	 Mount, G.A., D.G. Haile, and E. Daniels, 1997: Simulation 
of management strategies for the blacklegged tick (Acari: 
Ixodidae) and the Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burg­
dorferi. Journal of Medical Entomology, 34, 672-683.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/34.6.672 
35.	 Vail, S.G. and G. Smith, 1998: Air temperature and relative 
humidity effects on behavioral activity of blacklegged tick 
(Acari: Ixodidae) nymphs in New Jersey. Journal of Medical 
Entomology, 35, 1025-1028.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/35.6.1025 
36.	 Eisen, L., R.J. Eisen, and R.S. Lane, 2002: Seasonal activ­
ity patterns of Ixodes pacificus nymphs in relation to climatic 
conditions. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 16, 235-244. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2915.2002.00372.x 
37.	 Eisen, R.J., L. Eisen, M.B. Castro, and R.S. Lane, 2003: 
Environmentally related variability in risk of exposure to 
Lyme disease spirochetes in northern California: Effect of 
climatic conditions and habitat type. Environmental Ento­
mology, 32, 1010-1018.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0046-
225X-32.5.1010 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
149
38.	 Schulze, T.L. and R.A. Jordan, 2003: Meteorologically medi­
ated diurnal questing of Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma 
americanum (Acari: Ixodidae) nymphs. Journal of Medical 
Entomology, 40, 395-402.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0022-
2585-40.4.395 
39.	 Diuk-Wasser, M.A., G. Vourc’h, P. Cislo, A.G. Hoen, F. 
Melton, S.A. Hamer, M. Rowland, R. Cortinas, G.J. Hick­
ling, J.I. Tsao, A.G. Barbour, U. Kitron, J. Piesman, and D. 
Fish, 2010: Field and climate-based model for predicting the 
density of host-seeking nymphal Ixodes scapularis, an import­
ant vector of tick-borne disease agents in the eastern United 
States. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 19, 504-514.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00526.x 
40.	 Diuk-Wasser, M.A., A.G. Hoen, P. Cislo, R. Brinkerhoff, 
S.A. Hamer, M. Rowland, R. Cortinas, G. Vourc’h, F. 
Melton, G.J. Hickling, J.I. Tsao, J. Bunikis, A.G. Barbour, 
U. Kitron, J. Piesman, and D. Fish, 2012: Human risk of 
infection with Borrelia burgdorferi, the Lyme disease agent, in 
eastern United States. American Journal of Tropical Medicine 
and Hygiene, 86, 320-327.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajt­
mh.2012.11-0395 
41.	 Eisen, R.J., L. Eisen, Y.A. Girard, N. Fedorova, J. Mun, B. 
Slikas, S. Leonhard, U. Kitron, and R.S. Lane, 2010: A spa­
tially-explicit model of acarological risk of exposure to Bor­
relia burgdorferi-infected Ixodes pacificus nymphs in northwest­
ern California based on woodland type, temperature, and water 
vapor. Ticks and Tick-Borne Diseases, 1, 35-43.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2009.12.002 
42.	 Ostfeld, R.S., C.D. Canham, K. Oggenfuss, R.J. Winch­
combe, and F. Keesing, 2006: Climate, deer, rodents, and 
acorns as determinants of variation in Lyme-disease risk. Plos 
Biology, 4, 1058-1068.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/Journal.
Pbio.0040145 
43.	 Schulze, T.L., R.A. Jordan, C.J. Schulze, and R.W. Hung, 
2009: Precipitation and Temperature as Predictors of the 
Local Abundance of Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) 
Nymphs. Journal of Medical Entomology, 46, 1025-1029. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/033.046.0508 
44.	 Diuk-Wasser, M.A., A.G. Gatewood, M.R. Cortinas, S. Yare­
mych-Hamer, J. Tsao, U. Kitron, G. Hickling, J.S. Brown­
stein, E. Walker, J. Piesman, and D. Fish, 2006: Spatiotem­
poral patterns of host-seeking Ixodes scapularis nymphs (Acari: 
Iodidae) in the United States. Journal of Medical Entomology, 
43, 166-176.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/43.2.166 
45.	 Brownstein, J.S., T.R. Holford, and D. Fish, 2003: A cli­
mate-based model predicts the spatial distribution of the 
Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis in the United States. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 111, 1152-1157.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.6052 
46.	 Tran, P.M. and L. Waller, 2013: Effects of landscape frag­
mentation and climate on Lyme disease incidence in the 
northeastern United States. Ecohealth, 10, 394-404.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-013-0890-y 
47.	 CDC, 2015: Ticks: Life Cycle of Hard Ticks that Spread 
Disease. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlan­
ta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/ticks/life_cycle_and_hosts.html
48.	 Falco, R.C., D.F. McKenna, T.J. Daniels, R.B. Nadelman, 
J. Nowakowski, D. Fish, and G.P. Wormser, 1999: Tempo­
ral relation between Ixodes scapularis abundance and risk for 
Lyme disease associated with erythema migrans. American Jour­
nal of Epidemiology, 149, 771-776.  
49.	 Rollend, L., D. Fish, and J.E. Childs, 2013: Transovarial 
transmission of Borrelia spirochetes by Ixodes scapularis: A 
summary of the literature and recent observations. Ticks and 
Tick-Borne Diseases, 4, 46-51.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ttbdis.2012.06.008 
50.	 LoGiudice, K., S.T. Duerr, M.J. Newhouse, K.A. Schmidt, 
M.E. Killilea, and R.S. Ostfeld, 2008: Impact of host com­
munity composition on Lyme disease risk. Ecology, 89, 2841-
2849.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/07-1047.1 
51.	 Mather, T.N., M.L. Wilson, S.I. Moore, J.M. Ribeiro, and 
A. Spielman, 1989: Comparing the relative potential of 
rodents as reservoirs of the Lyme disease spirochete (Borrelia 
burgdorferi). American Journal of Epidemiology, 130, 143-50. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2787105
52.	 Stromdahl, E.Y. and G.J. Hickling, 2012: Beyond Lyme: 
Aetiology of tick-borne human diseases with emphasis 
on the south-eastern United States. Zoonoses and Public 
Health, 59, 48-64.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1863-
2378.2012.01475.x 
53.	 Estrada-Peña, A., 2002: Increasing habitat suitability in the 
United States for the tick that transmits Lyme disease: A 
remote sensing approach. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
110, 635-640. PMC1240908 
54.	 Bouchard, C., G. Beauchamp, P.A. Leighton, R. Lindsay, D. 
Belanger, and N.H. Ogden, 2013: Does high biodiversity 
reduce the risk of Lyme disease invasion? Parasites & Vectors, 
6, 195.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-6-195 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
150
55.	 Leighton, P.A., J.K. Koffi, Y. Pelcat, L.R. Lindsay, and 
N.H. Ogden, 2012: Predicting the speed of tick invasion: 
An empirical model of range expansion for the Lyme dis­
ease vector Ixodes scapularis in Canada. Journal of Applied 
Ecology, 49, 457-464.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2664.2012.02112.x 
56.	 Ogden, N.H., L. St-Onge, I.K. Barker, S. Brazeau, M. 
Bigras-Poulin, D.F. Charron, C.M. Francis, A. Heagy, L.R. 
Lindsay, A. Maarouf, P. Michel, F. Milord, C.J. O’Callaghan, 
L. Trudel, and R.A. Thompson, 2008: Risk maps for range 
expansion of the Lyme disease vector, Ixodes scapularis, in 
Canada now and with climate change. International Journal of 
Health Geographics, 7, 24.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
072X-7-24 
57.	 Ogden, N.H., C. Bouchard, K. Kurtenbach, G. Margos, L.R. 
Lindsay, L. Trudel, S. Nguon, and F. Milord, 2010: Active 
and passive surveillance and phylogenetic analysis of Borrelia 
burgdorferi elucidate the process of Lyme disease risk emergence 
in Canada. Environmental Health Perspectives, 118, 909-914. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901766 
58.	 Ogden, N.H., M. Radojević, X. Wu, V.R. Duvvuri, P.A. 
Leighton, and J. Wu, 2014: Estimated effects of projected 
climate change on the basic reproductive number of the 
Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 122, 631-638.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1307799 
59.	 Guerra, M., E. Walker, C. Jones, S. Paskewitz, M.R. Cor­
tinas, A. Stancil, L. Beck, M. Bobo, and U. Kitron, 2002: 
Predicting the risk of Lyme disease: Habitat suitability for 
Ixodes scapularis in the north central United States. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 8, 289-297.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid0803.010166 
60.	 Khatchikian, C.E., M. Prusinski, M. Stone, P.B. Backenson, 
I.N. Wang, M.Z. Levy, and D. Brisson, 2012: Geographical 
and environmental factors driving the increase in the Lyme 
disease vector Ixodes scapularis. Ecosphere, 3, art85.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00134.1 
61.	 Eisen, R.J., L. Eisen, and R.S. Lane, 2004: Habitat-related 
variation in infestation of lizards and rodents with Ixodes ticks 
in dense woodlands in Mendocino County, California. Exper­
imental and Applied Acarology, 33, 215-233.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/B:Appa.0000032954.71165.9e 
62.	 Ashley, S.T. and V. Meentemeyer, 2004: Climatic analysis 
of Lyme disease in the United States. Climate Research, 27, 
177-187.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3354/cr027177 
63.	 Tuite, A.R., A.L. Greer, and D.N. Fisman, 2013: Effect of 
latitude on the rate of change in incidence of Lyme disease in 
the United States. CMAJ Open, 1, E43-E47.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.9778/cmajo.20120002 
64.	 McCabe, G.J. and J.E. Bunnell, 2004: Precipitation and 
the occurrence of Lyme disease in the northeastern Unit­
ed States. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 4, 143-148. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/1530366041210765 
65.	 Subak, S., 2003: Effects of climate on variability in Lyme 
disease incidence in the northeastern United States. Amer­
ican Journal of Epidemiology, 157, 531-538.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/aje/kwg014 
66.	 Levi, T., F. Keesing, K. Oggenfuss, and R.S. Ostfeld, 2015: 
Accelerated phenology of blacklegged ticks under climate 
warming. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 370.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2013.0556 
67.	 Brownstein, J.S., T.R. Holford, and D. Fish, 2005: Effect 
of climate change on Lyme disease risk in North America. 
EcoHealth, 2, 38-46.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-
004-0139-x 
68.	 Brunner, J.L., M. Killilea, and R.S. Ostfeld, 2012: Overwin­
tering survival of nymphal Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) 
under natural conditions. Journal of Medical Entomology, 49, 
981-987.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/me12060 
69.	 Lindsay, L.R., I.K. Barker, G.A. Surgeoner, S.A. McEwen, 
T.J. Gillespie, and J.T. Robinson, 1995: Survival and devel­
opment of Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) under various 
climatic conditions in Ontario, Canada. Journal of Medical 
Entomology, 32, 143-152.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jme­
dent/32.2.143 
70.	 Ogden, N.H., A. Maarouf, I.K. Barker, M. Bigras-Poulin, 
L.R. Lindsay, M.G. Morshed, J. O’Callaghan C, F. Ramay, 
D. Waltner-Toews, and D.F. Charron, 2006: Climate change 
and the potential for range expansion of the Lyme disease 
vector Ixodes scapularis in Canada. International Journal for 
Parasitology, 36, 63-70.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpa­
ra.2005.08.016 
71.	 Ogden, N.H., J.K. Koffi, Y. Pelcat, and L.R. Lindsay, 2014: 
Environmental risk from Lyme disease in central and eastern 
Canada: A summary of recent surveillance information. Can­
ada Communicable Disease Report, 40, 74-82.  http://www.
phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ccdr-rmtc/14vol40/dr-rm40-05/
dr-rm40-05-1-eng.php

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
151
72.	 Monaghan, A.J., S.M. Moore, K.M. Sampson, C.B. Beard, 
and R.J. Eisen, 2015: Climate change influences on the annu­
al onset of Lyme disease in the United States. Ticks and Tick-
Borne Diseases, 6, 615-622.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ttbdis.2015.05.005 
73.	 CDC, 2014: Surveillance Resources: ArboNET. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Arboviral Diseases Branch, 
Fort Collins, CO. http://www.cdc.gov/westnile/resourcep­
ages/survResources.html
74.	 Lanciotti, R.S., J.T. Roehrig, V. Deubel, J. Smith, M. Parker, 
K. Steele, B. Crise, K.E. Volpe, M.B. Crabtree, J.H. Scher­
ret, R.A. Hall, J.S. MacKenzie, C.B. Cropp, B. Panigrahy, 
E. Ostlund, B. Schmitt, M. Malkinson, C. Banet, J. Weiss­
man, N. Komar, H.M. Savage, W. Stone, T. McNamara, and 
D.J. Gubler, 1999: Origin of the West Nile Virus responsible 
for an outbreak of encephalitis in the northeastern United 
States. Science, 286, 2333-2337.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.286.5448.2333 
75.	 Beasley, D.W., A.D. Barrett, and R.B. Tesh, 2013: Resur­
gence of West Nile neurologic disease in the United States 
in 2012: What happened? What needs to be done? Antivi­
ral Research, 99, 1-5.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.antivi­
ral.2013.04.015 
76.	 Petersen, L.R. and E.B. Hayes, 2004: Westward ho?—The 
spread of West Nile virus. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 351, 2257-2259.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMp048261 
77.	 Petersen, L.R., P.J. Carson, B.J. Biggerstaff, B. Custer, S.M. 
Borchardt, and M.P. Busch, 2013: Estimated cumulative 
incidence of West Nile virus infection in US adults, 1999-
2010. Epidemiology and Infection, 141, 591-595.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1017/S0950268812001070 
78.	 Busch, M.P., D.J. Wright, B. Custer, L.H. Tobler, S.L. 
Stramer, S.H. Kleinman, H.E. Prince, C. Bianco, G. Foster, 
L.R. Petersen, G. Nemo, and S.A. Glynn, 2006: West Nile 
virus infections projected from blood donor screening data, 
United States, 2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 12, 395-
402.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1203.051287 
79.	 Carson, P.J., S.M. Borchardt, B. Custer, H.E. Prince, J. 
Dunn-Williams, V. Winkelman, L. Tobler, B.J. Biggerstaff, 
R. Lanciotti, L.R. Petersen, and M.P. Busch, 2012: Neuroin­
vasive disease and West Nile virus infection, North Dakota, 
USA, 1999–2008. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 18, 684-686. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1804.111313 
80.	 Mostashari, F., M.L. Bunning, P.T. Kitsutani, D.A. Singer, 
D. Nash, M.J. Cooper, N. Katz, K.A. Liljebjelke, B.J. Big­
gerstaff, A.D. Fine, M.C. Layton, S.M. Mullin, A.J. John­
son, D.A. Martin, E.B. Hayes, and G.L. Campbell, 2001: 
Epidemic West Nile encephalitis, New York, 1999: Results 
of a household-based seroepidemiological survey. The Lan­
cet, 358, 261-264.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(01)05480-0 
81.	 Hayes, E.B., N. Komar, R.S. Nasci, S. Montgomery, D.R. 
O’Leary, and G.L. Campbell, 2005: Epidemiology and trans­
mission dynamics of West Nile virus disease. Emerging Infec­
tious Diseases, 11, 1167-1173.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1108.050289a 
82.	 Pealer, L.N., A.A. Marfin, L.R. Petersen, R.S. Lanciotti, P.L. 
Page, S.L. Stramer, M.G. Stobierski, K. Signs, B. Newman, 
H. Kapoor, J.L. Goodman, and M.E. Chamberland, 2003: 
Transmission of West Nile virus through blood transfusion 
in the United States in 2002. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 349, 1236-1245.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa030969 
83.	 Zou, S., G.A. Foster, R.Y. Dodd, L.R. Petersen, and S.L. 
Stramer, 2010: West Nile fever characteristics among viremic 
persons identified through blood donor screening. The Jour­
nal of Infectious Diseases, 202, 1354-1361.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/656602 
84.	 Nett, R.J., M.J. Kuehnert, M.G. Ison, J.P. Orlowski, M. 
Fischer, and J.E. Staples, 2012: Current practices and eval­
uation of screening solid organ donors for West Nile virus. 
Transplant Infectious Disease, 14, 268-277.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1399-3062.2012.00743.x 
85.	 Petersen, L.R., A.C. Brault, and R.S. Nasci, 2013: West 
Nile virus: Review of the literature. JAMA: The Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 310, 308-315.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.2013.8042 
86.	 Komar, N., 2003: West Nile virus: Epidemiology and ecol­
ogy in North America. The Flaviviruses: Detection, Diagnosis 
and Vaccine Development. Chambers, T. and T. Monath, Eds. 
Elsevier Academic Press, London, UK, 185-234.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/s0065-3527(03)61005-5 
87.	 Reisen, W.K., Y. Fang, and V.M. Martinez, 2005: Avian host 
and mosquito (Diptera: Culicidae) vector competence deter­
mine the efficiency of West Nile and St. Louis encephalitis 
virus transmission. Journal of Medical Entomology, 42, 367-
375.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0022-2585(2005)042%
5B0367:ahamdc%5D2.0.co;2 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
152
88.	 Darsie, R.F. and R.A. Ward, 2005: Identification and Geo­
graphical Distribution of the Mosquitos of North America, 
North of Mexico. University Press of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
383 pp.  
89.	 Eldridge, B.F., 1987: Diapause and related phenomena in 
Culex mosquitoes: Their relation to arbovirus disease ecology. 
Current Topics in Vector Research, 4, 1-28.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4712-8_1 
90.	 Nelms, B.M., P.A. Macedo, L. Kothera, H.M. Savage, and 
W.K. Reisen, 2013: Overwintering biology of Culex (Dip­
tera: Culicidae) mosquitoes in the Sacramento Valley of Cali­
fornia. Journal of Medical Entomology, 50, 773-790.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1603/me12280 
91.	 Mail, G. and R. McHugh, 1961: Relation of temperature 
and humidity to winter survival of Culex pipiens and Culex 
tarsalis. Mosquito News, 21, 252-254.  
92.	 DeGroote, J.P., R. Sugumaran, S.M. Brend, B.J. Tucker, and 
L.C. Bartholomay, 2008: Landscape, demographic, entomo­
logical, and climatic associations with human disease inci­
dence of West Nile virus in the state of Iowa, USA. Inter­
national Journal of Health Geographics, 7, 19.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-072x-7-19 
93.	 Eisen, L., C.M. Barker, C.G. Moore, W.J. Pape, A.M. Win­
ters, and N. Cheronis, 2010: Irrigated agriculture is an 
important risk factor for West Nile virus disease in the hype­
rendemic Larimer-Boulder-Weld area of north central Col­
orado. Journal of Medical Entomology, 47, 939-951.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/47.5.939 
94.	 Gibney, K.B., J. Colborn, S. Baty, A.M. Bunko Patterson, 
T. Sylvester, G. Briggs, T. Stewart, C. Levy, K. Komatsu, 
K. MacMillan, M.J. Delorey, J.-P. Mutebi, M. Fischer, and 
J.E. Staples, 2012: Modifiable risk factors for West Nile 
virus infection during an outbreak—Arizona, 2010. Amer­
ican Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 86, 895-901. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-0502 
95.	 Kilpatrick, A.M., P. Daszak, M.J. Jones, P.P. Marra, and L.D. 
Kramer, 2006: Host heterogeneity dominates West Nile 
virus transmission. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biolog­
ical Sciences, 273, 2327-2333.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.2006.3575 
96.	 Kilpatrick, A.M., 2011: Globalization, land use, and the 
invasion of West Nile virus. Science, 334, 323-327.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1201010 
97.	 Dusek, R.J., R.G. McLean, L.D. Kramer, S.R. Ubico, A.P. 
Dupuis, G.D. Ebel, and S.C. Guptill, 2009: Prevalence 
of West Nile virus in migratory birds during spring and 
fall migration. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene, 81, 1151-1158.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajt­
mh.2009.09-0106 
98.	 Owen, J., F. Moore, N. Panella, E. Edwards, R. Bru, M. 
Hughes, and N. Komar, 2006: Migrating birds as dispersal 
vehicles for West Nile virus. EcoHealth, 3, 79-85.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-006-0025-9 
99.	 Parmesan, C., 2006: Ecological and evolutionary responses 
to recent climate change. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, 
and Systematics, 37, 637-669.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.ecolsys.37.091305.110100 
100.	 Dodson, B.L., L.D. Kramer, and J.L. Rasgon, 2012: Effects 
of larval rearing temperature on immature development and 
West Nile virus vector competence of Culex tarsalis. Parasites 
& Vectors, 5, 199.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-5-
199 
101.	 Reisen, W.K., D. Cayan, M. Tyree, C.M. Barker, B. Eldridge, 
and M. Dettinger, 2008: Impact of climate variation on 
mosquito abundance in California. Journal of Vector Ecology, 
33, 89-98.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3376/1081-1710(2008)33
%5B89:iocvom%5D2.0.co;2 
102.	 Rueda, L.M., K.J. Patel, R.C. Axtell, and R.E. Stinner, 1990: 
Temperature-dependent development and survival rates of 
Culex quinquefasciatus and Aedes aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 27, 892-898.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jmedent/27.5.892 
103.	 Walter, N.M. and C.S. Hacker, 1974: Variation in life table 
characteristics among three geographic strains of Culex pip­
iens quinquefasciatus. Journal of Medical Entomology, 11, 
541-550.  
104.	 Reisen, W.K., 1995: Effect of temperature on Culex tarsa­
lis (Diptera: Culicidae) from the Coachella and San Joaquin 
Valleys of California. Journal of Medical Entomology, 32, 636-
645.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/32.5.636 
105.	 Garcia-Rejón, J.E., J.A. Farfan-Ale, A. Ulloa, L.F. Flores-
Flores, E. Rosado-Paredes, C. Baak-Baak, M.A. Loroño-Pi­
no, I. Fernández-Salas, and B.J. Beaty, 2008: Gonotrophic 
cycle estimate for Culex quinquefasciatus in Mérida, Yucatán, 
México. Journal of the American Mosquito Control Association, 
24, 344-348.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2987/5667.1 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
153
106.	 Hartley, D.M., C.M. Barker, A. Le Menach, T. Niu, H.D. 
Gaff, and W.K. Reisen, 2012: Effects of temperature on 
emergence and seasonality of West Nile virus in California. 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 86, 884-
894.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-0342 
107.	 Dohm, D.J., M.L. O’Guinn, and M.J. Turell, 2002: Effect 
of environmental temperature on the ability of Culex pip­
iens (Diptera: Culicidae) to transmit West Nile virus. Jour­
nal of Medical Entomology, 39, 221-225.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1603/0022-2585-39.1.221 
108.	 Kilpatrick, A.M., M.A. Meola, R.M. Moudy, and L.D. 
Kramer, 2008: Temperature, viral genetics, and the trans­
mission of West Nile virus by Culex pipiens mosquitoes. PLoS 
Pathogens, 4, e1000092.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
ppat.1000092 
109.	 Reisen, W.K., Y. Fang, and V.M. Martinez, 2006: Effects of 
temperature on the transmission of West Nile virus by Culex 
tarsalis (Diptera: Culicidae). Journal of Medical Entomology, 
43, 309-317.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/43.2.309 
110.	 Ruiz, M.O., L.F. Chaves, G.L. Hamer, T. Sun, W.M. Brown, 
E.D. Walker, L. Haramis, T.L. Goldberg, and U.D. Kitron, 
2010: Local impact of temperature and precipitation on 
West Nile virus infection in Culex species mosquitoes in north­
east Illinois, USA. Parasites & Vectors, 3, Article 19.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-3-19 
111.	 Soverow, J.E., G.A. Wellenius, D.N. Fisman, and M.A. Mit­
tleman, 2009: Infectious disease in a warming world: How 
weather influenced West Nile virus in the United States 
(2001–2005). Environmental Health Perspectives, 117, 1049-
1052.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800487 
112.	 Wimberly, M.C., A. Lamsal, P. Giacomo, and T.-W. Chuang, 
2014: Regional variation of climatic influences on West Nile 
virus outbreaks in the United States. American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 91, 677-684.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.4269/ajtmh.14-0239 
113.	 Winters, A.M., R.J. Eisen, S. Lozano-Fuentes, C.G. Moore, 
W.J. Pape, and L. Eisen, 2008: Predictive spatial models for 
risk of West Nile virus exposure in eastern and western Colo­
rado. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 79, 
581-590. PMC2581834 
114.	 Morin, C.W. and A.C. Comrie, 2013: Regional and season­
al response of a West Nile virus vector to climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 15620-
15625.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1307135110 
115.	 Calhoun, L.M., M. Avery, L. Jones, K. Gunarto, R. King, 
J. Roberts, and T.R. Burkot, 2007: Combined sewage over­
flows (CSO) are major urban breeding sites for Culex quinq­
uefasciatus  in Atlanta, Georgia. American Journal of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, 77, 478-484.  
116.	 Chuang, T.W., M.B. Hildreth, D.L. Vanroekel, and M.C. 
Wimberly, 2011: Weather and land cover influences on mos­
quito populations in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Journal of 
Medical Entomology, 48, 669-79.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/
me10246 
117.	 Barker, C.M., B.G. Bolling, W.C. Black, IV, C.G. Moore, 
and L. Eisen, 2009: Mosquitoes and West Nile virus along 
a river corridor from prairie to montane habitats in eastern 
Colorado. Journal of Vector Ecology, 34, 276-293.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1948-7134.2009.00036.x 
118.	 Wegbreit, J. and W.K. Reisen, 2000: Relationships among 
weather, mosquito abundance, and encephalitis virus activity 
in California: Kern County 1990-98. Journal of the American 
Mosquito Control Association, 16, 22-27.  
119.	 Landesman, W.J., B.F. Allan, R.B. Langerhans, T.M. Knight, 
and J.M. Chase, 2007: Inter-annual associations between 
precipitation and human incidence of West Nile Virus in the 
United States. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 7, 337-
343.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2006.0590 
120.	 Shaman, J., J.F. Day, and M. Stieglitz, 2005: Drought-in­
duced amplification and epidemic transmission of West Nile 
virus in southern Florida. Journal of Medical Entomology, 42, 
134-141.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/42.2.134 
121.	 Shaman, J., J.F. Day, and N. Komar, 2010: Hydrologic con­
ditions describe West Nile virus risk in Colorado. Interna­
tional Journal of Environmental Research and Pulic Health, 7, 
494-508.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7020494 
122.	 Shaman, J., K. Harding, and S.R. Campbell, 2011: Mete­
orological and hydrological influences on the spatial and 
temporal prevalence of West Nile virus in Culex mosquitos, 
Suffolk County, New York. Journal of Medical Entomology, 48, 
867-875.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME10269 
123.	 Pecoraro, H.L., H.L. Day, R. Reineke, N. Stevens, J.C. Withey, 
J.M. Marzluff, and J.S. Meschke, 2007: Climatic and land­
scape correlates for potential West Nile virus mosquito vec­
tors in the Seattle region. Journal of Vector Ecology, 32, 22-28.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3376/1081-1710(2007)32%5B22:­
CALCFP%5D2.0.CO;2 

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
154
124.	 Gardner, A.M., G.L. Hamer, A.M. Hines, C.M. Newman, 
E.D. Walker, and M.O. Ruiz, 2012: Weather variabili­
ty affects abundance of larval Culex (Diptera: Culicidae) in 
storm water catch basins in suburban Chicago. Journal of Med­
ical Entomology, 49, 270-276.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/
ME11073 
125.	 Johnson, B.J. and M.V.K. Sukhdeo, 2013: Drought-induced 
amplification of local and regional West Nile virus infection 
rates in New Jersey. Journal of Medical Entomology, 50, 195-
204.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/me12035 
126.	 Reeves, W.C., S.M. Asman, J.L. Hardy, M.M. Milby, and 
W.K. Reisen, 1990: Epidemiology and Control of Mosqui­
to-Borne Arboviruses in California, 1943-1987. California 
Mosquito and Vector Control Association, Sacramento, CA, 
508 pp.  
127.	 Reisen, W.K., R.P. Meyer, M.M. Milby, S.B. Presser, R.W. 
Emmons, J.L. Hardy, and W.C. Reeves, 1992: Ecological obser­
vations on the 1989 outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis virus in 
the southern San Joaquin Valley of California. Journal of Med­
ical Entomology, 29, 472-482.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/29.3.472 
128.	 Shaman, J., J.F. Day, and M. Stieglitz, 2004: The spatial-tem­
poral distribution of drought, wetting, and human cases of 
St. Louis encephalitis in southcentral Florida. American Jour­
nal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 71, 251-261.  http://
www.ajtmh.org/content/71/3/251.long
129.	 Forrester, N.L., J.L. Kenney, E. Deardorff, E. Wang, and 
S.C. Weaver, 2008: Western equine encephalitis submer­
gence: Lack of evidence for a decline in virus virulence. 
Virology, 380, 170-172.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
virol.2008.08.012 
130.	 Reisen, W.K., Y. Fang, and A.C. Brault, 2008: Limited inter­
decadal variation in mosquito (Diptera: Culicidae) and avi­
an host competence for Western equine encephalomyelitis 
virus (Togaviridae: Alphavirus). American Journal of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, 78, 681-686.  http://www.ajtmh.org/
content/78/4/681.full.pdf+html
131.	 Manore, C.A., J.K. Davis, R.C. Christofferson, D.M. Wes­
son, J.M. Hyman, and C.N. Mores, 2014: Towards an early 
warning system for forecasting human west nile virus inci­
dence. PLoS Currents, 6.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/cur­
rents.outbreaks.f0b3978230599a56830ce30cb9ce0500 
132.	 Harrigan, R.J., H.A. Thomassen, W. Buermann, and T.B. 
Smith, 2014: A continental risk assessment of West Nile 
virus under climate change. Global Change Biology, 20, 
2417-2425.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12534 
133.	 Bennett, C.M. and A.J. McMichael, 2010: Non-heat related 
impacts of climate change on working populations. Glob­
al Health Action, 3, 5640.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/gha.
v3i0.5640 
134.	 Brunkard, J.M., E. Cifuentes, and S.J. Rothenberg, 2008: 
Assessing the roles of temperature, precipitation, and 
ENSO in dengue re-emergence on the Texas-Mexico bor­
der region. Salud Publica Mex, 50, 227-234.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/S0036-36342008000300006 
135.	 Gubler, D.J., P. Reiter, K.L. Ebi, W. Yap, R. Nasci, and J.A. 
Patz, 2001: Climate variability and change in the United 
States: Potential impacts on vector- and rodent-borne dis­
eases. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109, 223-233. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3435012 
136.	 Ramos, M.M., H. Mohammed, E. Zielinski-Gutierrez, 
M.H. Hayden, J.L.R. Lopez, M. Fournier, A.R. Trujillo, R. 
Burton, J.M. Brunkard, L. Anaya-Lopez, A.A. Banicki, P.K. 
Morales, B. Smith, J.L. Muñoz, and S.H. Waterman, 2008: 
Epidemic dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever at the Tex­
as–Mexico border: Results of a household-based seroepide­
miologic survey, December 2005. American Journal of Trop­
ical Medicine and Hygiene, 78, 364-369.  http://www.ajtmh.
org/content/78/3/364.full.pdf+html
137.	 Reiter, P., S. Lathrop, M. Bunning, B. Biggerstaff, D. Sing­
er, T. Tiwari, L. Baber, M. Amador, J. Thirion, J. Hayes, 
C. Seca, J. Mendez, B. Ramirez, J. Robinson, J. Rawlings, 
V. Vorndam, S. Waterman, D. Gubler, G. Clark, and E. 
Hayes, 2003: Texas lifestyle limits transmission of dengue 
virus. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 9, 86-89.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid0901.020220 
138.	 CDC, 2015: Lyme Disease: Preventing Tick Bites on Peo­
ple. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 
GA. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/prev/on_people.html
139.	 Finch, C., M.S. Al-Damluji, P.J. Krause, L. Niccolai, T. 
Steeves, C.F. O’Keefe, and M.A. Diuk-Wasser, 2014: Inte­
grated assessment of behavioral and environmental risk 
factors for Lyme disease infection on Block Island, Rhode 
Island. PLoS ONE, 9, e84758.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0084758 
140.	 Bowen, G.S., T.L. Schulze, C. Hayne, and W.E. Parkin, 
1984: A focus of Lyme disease in Monmouth County, New 
Jersey. American Journal of Epidemiology, 120, 387-394. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6475916

5-VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
155
141.	 Schwartz, B.S. and M.D. Goldstein, 1990: Lyme disease in 
outdoor workers: Risk factors, preventive measures, and tick 
removal methods. American Journal of Epidemiology, 131, 
877-885.  
142.	 Schwartz, B.S., M.D. Goldstein, and J.E. Childs, 1994: 
Longitudinal study of Borrelia burgdorferi infection in New 
Jersey outdoor workers, 1988-1991. American Journal of Epi­
demiology, 139, 504-512.  
143.	 NIOSH, 2005: Recommendations for Protecting Outdoor 
Workers from West Nile Virus Exposure. DHHS (NIOSH) 
Publication No. 2005–155, 16 pp. Department of Health 
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Pre­
vention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2005-155/
144.	 Brien, J.D., J.L. Uhrlaub, A. Hirsch, C.A. Wiley, and 
J. Nikolich-Žugich, 2009: Key role of T cell defects in 
age-related vulnerability to West Nile virus. The Journal of 
Experimental Medicine, 206, 2735-2745.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1084/jem.20090222 
145.	 Weiss, D., D. Carr, J. Kellachan, C. Tan, M. Phillips, 
E. Bresnitz, M. Layton, and West Nile Virus Outbreak 
Response Working Group, 2001: Clinical findings of West 
Nile virus infection in hospitalized patients, New York and 
New Jersey, 2000. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 7, 654-658. 
PMC2631758 
146.	 WHO, 2015: Dengue and Severe Dengue. Fact Sheet No. 
117. World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs117/en/index.html
147.	 USGS, 2014: Dengue Fever (Locally Acquired) Human 
2013. Cumulative data as of May 7, 2014. United States 
Geological Survey. http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov/2013/del_
us_human.html
148.	 PAHO, 2014: Chikungunya. Pan American Health Organi­
zation, Washington, D.C. http://www.paho.org/hq/index.
php?Itemid=40931
149.	 Parham, P.E., J. Waldock, G.K. Christophides, D. Hem­
ming, F. Agusto, K.J. Evans, N. Fefferman, H. Gaff, A. 
Gumel, S. LaDeau, S. Lenhart, R.E. Mickens, E.N. Naumo­
va, R.S. Ostfeld, P.D. Ready, M.B. Thomas, J. Velasco-Her­
nandez, and E. Michael, 2015: Climate, environmental and 
socio-economic change: Weighing up the balance in vec­
tor-borne disease transmission. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0551 
150.	 Reiner, R.C., T.A. Perkins, C.M. Barker, T. Niu, L.F. Chaves, 
A.M. Ellis, D.B. George, A. Le Menach, J.R.C. Pulliam, 
D. Bisanzio, C. Buckee, C. Chiyaka, D.A.T. Cummings, 
A.J. Garcia, M.L. Gatton, P.W. Gething, D.M. Hartley, G. 
Johnston, E.Y. Klein, E. Michael, S.W. Lindsay, A.L. Lloyd, 
D.M. Pigott, W.K. Keisen, N. Ruktanonchai, B.K. Singh, 
A.J. Tatem, U. Kitron, S.I. Hay, T.W. Scott, and D.L. Smith, 
2013: A systematic review of mathematical models of mos­
quito-borne pathogen transmission: 1970-2010. Journal of 
the Royal Society Interface, 10.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2012.0921 

This page intentionally left blank
End
© Pete Oxford/Minden Pictures/Corbis

CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-
RELATED ILLNESS
6
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Lead Authors
Juli Trtanj
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Lesley Jantarasami* 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Contributing Authors
Joan Brunkard
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Tracy Collier
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
John Jacobs
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Erin Lipp
The University of Georgia
Sandra McLellan
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Stephanie Moore
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and 
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
Hans Paerl
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
John Ravenscroft
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Mario Sengco
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Jeanette Thurston
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Recommended Citation: Trtanj, J., L. Jantarasami, J. Brunkard, T. Collier, J. Jacobs, E. Lipp, S. McLellan, S. Moore, H. Paerl, J. 
Ravenscroft, M. Sengco, and J. Thurston, 2016: Ch. 6: Climate Impacts on Water-Related Illness. The Impacts of Climate Change on 
Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 157–188.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J03F4MH4
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
*Chapter Coordinator
Acknowledgements: Sharon Nappier, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

158
CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-
RELATED ILLNESS
FPO
6
Key Findings
Seasonal and Geographic Changes in Waterborne Illness Risk
Key Finding 1: Increases in water temperatures associated with climate change will alter the seasonal windows 
of growth and the geographic range of suitable habitat for freshwater toxin-producing harmful algae [Very 
Likely, High Confidence], certain naturally occurring Vibrio bacteria [Very Likely, Medium Confidence], and 
marine toxin-producing harmful algae [Likely, Medium Confidence]. These changes will increase the risk of 
exposure to waterborne pathogens and algal toxins that can cause a variety of illnesses [Medium Confidence].
Runoff from Extreme Precipitation Increases Exposure Risk
Key Finding 2:  Runoff from more frequent and intense extreme precipitation events will increasingly compromise 
recreational waters, shellfish harvesting waters, and sources of drinking water through increased introduction 
of pathogens and prevalence of toxic algal blooms [High Confidence]. As a result, the risk of human exposure 
to agents of water-related illness will increase [Medium Confidence]. 
Water Infrastructure Failure
Key Finding 3: Increases in some extreme weather events and storm surges will increase the risk that 
infrastructure for drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater will fail due to either damage or exceedance 
of system capacity, especially in areas with aging infrastructure [High Confidence]. As a result, the risk of 
exposure to water-related pathogens, chemicals, and algal toxins will increase in recreational and shellfish 
harvesting waters and in drinking water where treatment barriers break down [Medium Confidence].

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
159
6.1	 Introduction
Across most of the United States, climate change is expected 
to affect fresh and marine water resources in ways that will 
increase people’s exposure to water-related contaminants 
that cause illness. Water-related illnesses include waterborne 
diseases caused by pathogens, such as bacteria, viruses, and 
protozoa. Water-related illnesses are also caused by toxins 
produced by certain harmful algae and cyanobacteria (also 
known as blue-green algae) and by chemicals introduced 
into the environment by human activities.  Exposure occurs 
through ingestion, inhalation, or direct contact with contami­
nated drinking or recreational water and through consumption 
of fish and shellfish. 
Factors related to climate change—including temperature, 
precipitation and related runoff, hurricanes, and storm surge—
affect the growth, survival, spread, and virulence or toxicity of 
agents (causes) of water-related illness. Heavy downpours are 
already on the rise and increases in the frequency and inten­
sity of extreme precipitation events are projected for all U.S. 
regions.1 Projections of temperature, precipitation, extreme 
events such as flooding and drought, and other climate factors 
vary by region of the United States, and thus the extent of 
climate health impacts will also vary by region. 
Figure 1: This conceptual diagram for an example of infection by Vibrio species (V. vulnificus, V. parahaemolyticus, or V. alginolyticus) 
illustrates the key pathways by which humans are exposed to health threats from climate drivers. These climate drivers create more 
favorable growing conditions for these naturally occurring pathogens in coastal environments through their effects on coastal salinity, 
turbidity (water clarity), or plankton abundance and composition. Longer seasons for growth and expanding geographic range of 
occurrence increase the risk of exposure to Vibrio, which can result in various potential health outcomes (center boxes). These 
exposure pathways exist within the context of other factors that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). 
Key factors that influence vulnerability for individuals are shown in the right box and include social determinants of health and 
behavioral choices. Key factors that influence vulnerability at larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and 
management, and institutions, are shown in the left box. All of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s 
vulnerability through changes in exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change. See Ch. 
1: Introduction for more information.
Climate Change and Health—Vibrio

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
160
Waterborne pathogens are estimated to cause 8.5% to 12% 
of acute gastrointestinal illness cases in the United States, 
affecting between 12 million and 19 million people annually.2, 
3, 4 Eight pathogens, which are all affected to some degree 
by climate, account for approximately 97% of all suspected 
waterborne illnesses in the United States: the enteric viruses 
norovirus, rotavirus, and adenovirus; the bacteria Campylo­
bacter jejuni, E. coli O157:H7, and Salmonella enterica; and 
the protozoa Cryptosporidium and Giardia.5
Specific health outcomes are determined by different exposure 
pathways and multiple other social and behavioral factors, 
some of which are also affected by climate (Figure 1). Most 
research to date has focused on understanding how climate 
drivers affect physical and ecological processes that act as key 
exposure pathways for pathogens and toxins, as shown by the 
arrow moving from the top to the middle box in Figure 1. There 
is currently less information and fewer methods with which to 
measure actual human exposure and incidence of illness based 
on those physical and ecological metrics (arrow moving from 
middle to bottom box in Figure 1). Thus, it is often not possible 
to quantitatively project future health outcomes from water-re­
lated illnesses under climate change (bottom box in Figure 1).
This chapter covers health risks associated with changes in 
natural marine, coastal, and freshwater systems and water 
infrastructure for drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater 
(Legionella in aerosolized water is covered in Ch. 3: Air Quality 
Impacts). This chapter also includes fish and shellfish illnesses 
associated with the waters in which they grow and which are 
affected by the same climate factors that affect drinking and 
recreational waters (impacts related to handling and post-har­
vest processing of seafood are covered in Ch. 7: Food Safety). 
The framing of this chapter addresses sources of contamina­
tions, exposure pathways, and health outcomes when avail­
able. Based on the available data and research, many of the 
examples are regionally focused and make evident that the 
impact of climate change on water-related illness is inherently 
regional. Table 1 lists various health outcomes that can result 
from exposure to agents of water-related illness as well as key 
climate-related changes affecting their occurrence. 
Whether or not illness results from exposure to contaminat­
ed water, fish, or shellfish is dependent on a complex set of 
factors, including human behavior and social determinants 
of health that may affect a person’s exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity (Figure 1; see also Ch. 1: Introduction and 
Table 1. Climate Sensitive Agents of Water Related Illness
Pathogen or Toxin 
Producer
Exposure 
Pathway
Selected Health Outcomes & 
Symptoms 
Major Climate Correlation or 
Driver (strongest driver(s) 
listed first) 
Algae: Toxigenic marine 
species of  Alexandrium, 
Pseudo-nitzschia, Dinophysis, 
Gambierdiscus; Karenia 
brevis
Shellfish
Fish
Recreational 
waters 
(aerosolized 
toxins)
Gastrointestinal and neurologic illness 
caused by shellfish poisoning (paralytic, 
amnesic, diarrhetic, neurotoxic) or fish 
poisoning (ciguatera). 
Asthma exacerbations, eye irritations 
caused by contact with aerosolized 
toxins (K. brevis).
Temperature (increased water 
temperature), ocean surface 
currents, ocean acidification, 
hurricanes (Gambierdiscus spp. 
and K. brevis)
Cyanobacteria (multiple 
freshwater species producing 
toxins including microcystin)
Drinking water 
Recreational 
waters
Liver and kidney damage, 
gastroenteritis (diarrhea and vomiting), 
neurological disorders, and respiratory 
arrest.
Temperature, precipitation patterns
Enteric bacteria & protozoan 
parasites: Salmonella 
enterica; Campylobacter 
species; Toxigenic Escherichia 
coli; Cryptosporidium; Giardia
Drinking water 
Recreational 
waters 
Shellfish
Enteric pathogens generally cause 
gastroenteritis. Some cases may be 
severe and may be associated with 
long-term and recurring effects.
Temperature (air and water; both 
increase and decrease), heavy 
precipitation, and flooding
Enteric viruses: enteroviruses; 
rotaviruses; noroviruses; 
hepatitis A and E
Drinking water 
Recreational 
waters
Shellfish
Most cases result in gastrointestinal 
illness. Severe outcomes may include 
paralysis and infection of the heart or 
other organs.
Heavy precipitation, flooding, and 
temperature (air and water; both 
increase and decrease)
Leptospira and Leptonema 
bacteria
Recreational 
waters
Mild to severe flu-like illness (with 
or without fever) to severe cases of 
meningitis, kidney, and liver failure.
Flooding, temperature (increased 
water temperature), heavy 
precipitation
Vibrio bacteria species
Recreational 
waters 
Shellfish
Varies by species but include 
gastroenteritis (V. parahaemolyticus, 
V. cholerae), septicemia (bloodstream 
infection) through ingestion or wounds 
(V. vulnificus), skin, eye, and ear 
infections (V. alginolyticus).
Temperature (increased water 
temperature), sea level rise, 
precipitation patterns (as it affects 
coastal salinity)

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
161
Ch. 9: Populations of Concern). Water resource, public health, 
and environmental agencies in the United States provide many 
public health safeguards to reduce risk of exposure and illness 
even if water becomes contaminated. These include water 
quality monitoring, drinking water treatment standards and 
practices, beach closures, and issuing advisories for boiling 
drinking water and harvesting shellfish.
Many water-related illnesses are either undiagnosed or unre­
ported, and therefore the total incidence of waterborne disease 
is underestimated (see Ch. 1: Introduction for discussion of pub­
lic health surveillance data limitations related to “reportable” 
and “nationally notifiable” diseases).6, 7 On average, illnesses 
from pathogens associated with water are thought to be under­
estimated by as much as 43-fold, and may be underestimated 
by up to 143 times for certain Vibrio species.7 
6.2	 Sources of Water-Related Contaminants 
The primary sources of water contamination are human and 
animal waste and agricultural activities, including the use of 
fertilizers. Runoff and flooding resulting from expected increas­
es in extreme precipitation, hurricane rainfall, and storm surge 
(see Ch. 4: Extreme Events) may increase risks of contamination. 
Contamination occurs when agents of water-related illness and 
nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are carried from 
urban, residential, and agricultural areas into surface waters, 
groundwater, and coastal waters (Figure 2). The nutrient loading 
can promote growth of naturally occurring pathogens and 
algae. Human exposure occurs via contamination of drinking 
water sources (page 163), recreational waters (page 164), and 
fish and shellfish (page 165).
Water contamination by human waste is tied to failure of local 
urban or rural water infrastructure, including municipal waste­
water, septic, and stormwater conveyance systems. Failure can 
occur either when rainfall and subsequent runoff overwhelm 
the capacity of these systems—causing, for example, sewer 
overflows, basement backups, or localized flooding—or when 
extreme events like flooding and storm surges damage water 
conveyance or treatment infrastructure and result in reduction 
or loss of performance and functionality. Many older cities 
in the Northeast and around the Great Lakes region of the 
United States have combined sewer systems (with storm­
water and sewage sharing the same pipes), which are prone 
to discharging raw sewage directly into surface waters after 
moderate to heavy rainfall.8 The amount of rain that causes 
combined sewer overflows is highly variable between cities 
because of differences in infrastructure capacity and design, 
and ranges from 5 mm (about 0.2 inches) to 2.5 cm (about 1 
inch).9, 10 Overall, combined sewer overflows are expected to 
increase,11 but site-specific analysis is needed 
to predict the extent of these increases (see 
Case Study on page 164). Extreme precipita­
tion events will exacerbate existing problems 
with inadequate, aging, or deteriorating waste­
water infrastructure throughout the country.12, 
13 These problems include broken or leaking 
sewer pipes and failing septic systems that 
leach sewage into the ground. Runoff or con­
taminated groundwater discharge also carries 
pathogens and nutrients into surface water, 
including freshwater and marine coastal areas 
and beaches.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 
Water contamination from agricultural activities 
is related to the release of microbial pathogens 
or nutrients in livestock manure and inorganic 
fertilizers that can stimulate rapid and excessive 
growth or blooms of harmful algae. Agricultural 
land covers about 900 million acres across the 
United States,22 comprising over 2 million farms, 
with livestock sectors concentrated in certain 
regions of the United States (Figure 3). Depend­
ing on the type and number of animals, a large 
livestock operation can produce between 2,800 
and 1,600,000 tons of manure each year.23, 24 
With the projected increases in heavy precipita­
tion for all U.S. regions,1 agricultural sources of 
contamination can affect water quality across 
Links between Climate Change, Water Quantity and Quality, 
and Human Exposure to Water-Related Illness. 
Figure 2: Precipitation and temperature changes affect fresh and marine water 
quantity and quality primarily through urban, rural, and agricultural runoff. This 
runoff in turn affects human exposure to water-related illnesses primarily through 
contamination of drinking water, recreational water, and fish and shellfish.

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
162
the Nation. Runoff from lands where manure has been used as 
fertilizer or where flooding has caused wastewater lagoons to 
overflow can carry contamination agents directly from the land 
into water bodies.23, 24, 25 
Management practices and technologies, such as better timing 
of manure application and improved animal feeds, help reduce 
or eliminate the risks of manure-borne contaminant transport 
to public water supplies and shellfish harvesting waters and 
reduce nutrients that stimulate harmful algal blooms.23, 25, 28, 29 
Drinking water treatment and monitoring practices also help 
to decrease or eliminate exposure to waterborne illness agents 
originating from agricultural environments. 
Water contamination from wildlife (for example, rodents, birds, 
deer, and wild pigs) occurs via feces and urine of infected ani­
mals, which are reservoirs of enteric and other pathogens.29, 30, 
31 Warmer winters and earlier springs are expected to increase 
animal activity and alter the ecology and habitat of animals that 
may carry pathogens.1 This may lengthen the exposure period 
for humans and expand the geographic ranges in which patho­
gens are transmitted.1, 32 
6.3	 Exposure Pathways and Health Risks
Humans are exposed to agents of water-related illness through 
several pathways, including drinking water (treated and untreat­
ed), recreational waters (freshwater, coastal, and marine), and 
fish and shellfish. 
Locations of Livestock and Projections of Heavy Precipitation
Figure 3: This figure compares the geographic distribution of chicken, cattle, and hog and pig densities to the projected change in 
annual maximum 5-day precipitation totals (2046–2065 compared to 1981–2000, multi-model average using RCP8.5) across the 
continental United States. Increasing frequency and intensity of precipitation and subsequent increases in runoff are key climate 
factors that increase the potential for pathogens associated with livestock waste to contaminate water bodies. (Figure sources: 
adapted from USDA 2014 and Sun et al. 2015).26, 27

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
163
Drinking Water
Although the United States has one of the safest municipal 
drinking water supplies in the world, water-related outbreaks 
(more than one illness case linked to the same source) still 
occur.33 Public drinking water systems provide treated water to 
approximately 90% of Americans at their places of residence, 
work, or schools.34 However, about 15% of the population 
relies fully or in part on untreated private wells or other private 
sources for their drinking water.35 These private sources are not 
regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act.36 The majority of 
drinking water outbreaks in the United States are associated 
with untreated or inadequately treated groundwater and distri­
bution system deficiencies.33, 37 
Pathogen and Algal Toxin Contamination 
Between 1948 and 1994, 68% of waterborne disease outbreaks 
in the United States were preceded by extreme precipitation 
events,38 and heavy rainfall and flooding continue to be cited 
as contributing factors in more recent outbreaks in multiple 
regions of the United States.39 Extreme precipitation events 
have been statistically linked to increased levels of pathogens in 
treated drinking water supplies40 and to an increased incidence 
of gastrointestinal illness in children.21, 41 This established 
relationship suggests that extreme precipitation is a key climate 
factor for waterborne disease.42, 43, 44, 45 The Milwaukee Crypto­
sporidium outbreak in 1993—the largest documented water­
borne disease outbreak in U.S. history, causing an estimated 
403,000 illnesses and more than 50 deaths46—was preceded by 
the heaviest rainfall event in 50 years in the adjacent water­
sheds.10 Various treatment plant operational problems were 
also key contributing factors.47 (See future projections in the 
Case Study on page 164). Observations in England and Wales 
also show waterborne disease outbreaks were preceded by 
weeks of low cumulative rainfall and then heavy precipitation 
events, suggesting that drought or periods of low rainfall may 
also be important climate-related factors.48 
Small community or private groundwater wells or other 
drinking water systems where water is untreated or minimally 
treated are especially susceptible to contamination following 
extreme precipitation events.49 For example, in May 2000, fol­
lowing heavy rains, livestock waste containing E. coli O157:H7 
and Campylobacter was carried in runoff to a well that served 
as the primary drinking water source for the town of Walk­
erton, Ontario, Canada, resulting in 2,300 illnesses and 7 
deaths.43, 44, 50 High rainfall amounts were an important catalyst 
for the outbreak, although non-climate factors, such as well in­
frastructure, operational and maintenance problems, and lack 
of communication between public utilities staff and local health 
officials were also key factors.44, 51
Likewise, extreme precipitation events and subsequent in­
creases in runoff are key climate factors that increase nutrient 
loading in drinking water sources, which in turn increases the 
likelihood of harmful cyanobacterial blooms that produce algal 
toxins.52 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has estab­
lished health advisories for two algal toxins (microcystins and 
cylindrospermopsin) in drinking water.53 Lakes and reservoirs 
that serve as sources of drinking water for between 30 million 
and 48 million Americans may be periodically contaminated 
by algal toxins.54 Certain drinking water treatment processes 
can remove cyanobacterial toxins; however, efficacy of the 
treatment processes may vary from 60% to 99.9%. Ineffective 
treatment could compromise water quality and may lead to 
severe treatment disruption or treatment plant shutdown.53, 
54, 55, 56 Such an event occurred in Toledo, Ohio, in August 2014, 
when nearly 500,000 residents of the state’s fourth-largest city 
lost access to their drinking water after tests revealed the pres­
ence of toxins from a cyanobacterial bloom in Lake Erie near 
the water plant’s intake.57   
Water Supply
Climate-related hydrologic changes such as those related to 
flooding, drought, runoff, snowpack and snowmelt, and saltwa­
ter intrusion (the movement of ocean water into fresh ground­
water) have implications for freshwater management and 
supply (see also Ch. 4: Extreme Events).58 Adequate freshwater 
supply is essential to many aspects of public health, including 
provision of drinking water and proper sanitation and personal 
hygiene. For example, following floods or storms, short-term 
loss of access to potable water has been linked to increased 
incidence of illnesses including gastroenteritis and respiratory 
tract and skin infections.59 Changes in precipitation and runoff, 
combined with changes in consumption and withdrawal, have 
reduced surface and groundwater supplies in many areas, 
primarily in the western United States.58 These trends are ex­
pected to continue under future climate change, increasing the 
likelihood of water shortages for many uses.58
Future climate-related water shortages may result in more 
municipalities and individuals relying on alternative sources for 
drinking water, including reclaimed water and roof-harvested 
rainwater.60, 61, 62, 63 Water reclamation refers to the treatment of 
stormwater, industrial wastewater, and municipal wastewater 
Extreme precipitation events have been statistically linked to 
increased levels of pathogens in treated drinking water supplies.

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
164
for beneficial reuse.64 States like California, Arizona, New Mex­
ico, Texas, and Florida are already implementing wastewater 
reclamation and reuse practices as a means of conserving and 
adding to freshwater supplies.65 However, no federal regulations 
or criteria for public health protection have been developed 
or proposed specifically for potable water reuse in the United 
States.66 Increasing household rainwater collection has also 
been seen in some areas of the country (primarily Arizona, Colo­
rado, and Texas), although in some cases, exposure to untreated 
rainwater has been found to pose health risks from bacterial or 
protozoan pathogens, such as Salmonella enterica and Giardia 
lamblia.67, 68, 69
Projected Changes
Runoff from more frequent and intense extreme precipitation 
events will contribute to contamination of drinking water sourc­
es with pathogens and algal toxins and place additional stress­
es on the capacity of drinking water treatment facilities and 
distribution systems.10, 52, 59, 70, 71, 72, 73 Contamination of drinking 
water sources may be exacerbated or insufficiently addressed 
by treatment processes at the treatment plant or by breaches 
in the distribution system, such as during water main breaks 
or low-pressure events.13 Untreated groundwater drawn from 
municipal and private wells is of particular concern.  
Climate change is not expected to substantially increase the risk 
of contracting illness from drinking water for those people who 
are served by treated drinking water systems, if appropriate 
treatment and distribution is maintained. However, projections 
of more frequent or severe extreme precipitation events, flood­
ing, and storm surge suggest that drinking water infrastructure 
may be at greater risk of disruption or failure due to damage or 
exceedance of system capacity.6, 58, 70, 74, 75 Aging drinking water 
infrastructure is one longstanding limitation in controlling wa­
terborne disease, and may be especially susceptible to failure.6, 
13, 74 For example, there are more than 50,000 systems providing 
treated drinking water to communities in the United States, 
and most water distribution pipes in these systems are already 
failing or will reach their expected lifespan and require replace­
ment within 30 years.6 Breakdowns in drinking water treatment 
and distribution systems, compounded by aging infrastructure, 
could lead to more serious and frequent health consequences 
than those we experience now.
Recreational Waters
Humans are exposed to agents of water-related illness through 
recreation (such as swimming, fishing, and boating) in freshwa­
ter and marine or coastal waters. Exposure may occur directly 
(ingestion and contact with water) or incidentally (inhalation of 
aerosolized water droplets). 
Pathogen and Algal Toxin Contamination
Enteric viruses, especially noroviruses, from human waste are 
a primary cause of gastrointestinal illness from exposure to 
contaminated recreational fresh and marine water (Table 1).77 
Although there are comparatively few reported illnesses and 
outbreaks of gastrointestinal illness from recreating in marine 
waters compared to freshwater, marine contamination still pres­
ents a significant health risk.39, 78, 79, 80, 81 Illnesses from marine 
sources are less likely to be reported than those from fresh­
water beaches in part because the geographical residences of 
beachgoers are more widely distributed (for example, tourists 
may travel to marine beaches for vacation) and illnesses are less 
often attributed to marine exposure as a common source.39, 77 
Key climate factors associated with risks of exposure to enteric 
pathogens in both freshwater and marine recreational waters 
include extreme precipitation events, flooding, and tempera­
ture. For example, Salmonella and Campylobacter concentra­
tions in freshwater streams in the southeastern United States 
increase significantly in the summer months and following 
heavy rainfall.82, 83, 84 In the Great Lakes—a freshwater system—
changes in rainfall, higher lake temperatures, and low lake levels 
have been linked to increases in fecal bacteria levels.10 The 
zoonotic bacteria Leptospira are introduced into water from the 
urine of animals,85, 86 and increased illness rates in humans are 
linked to warm temperatures and flooding events.87, 88, 89, 90, 91 
In marine waters, recreational exposure to naturally occurring 
bacterial pathogens (such as Vibrio species) may result in eye, 
ear, and wound infections, diarrheal illness, or death (Table 1).92, 
93, 94 Reported rates of illness for all Vibrio infections have tripled 
since 1996, with V. alginolyticus infections having increased by 
40-fold.92 Vibrio growth rates are highly responsive to rising sea 
Case Study: Modeling Future Extreme 
Precipitation and Combined Sewer Overflows in 
Great Lakes Urban Coastal Areas
The Great Lakes contain 20% of the Earth’s surface 
freshwater and provide drinking water to 40 million 
people. Milwaukee, WI, is typical of urban areas in the 
Great Lakes in that it has a combined sewer system 
that overflows during moderate or heavy rainfall. 
In 1994, unrelated to but shortly after the 1993 
Cryptosporidium outbreak, the city completed a project 
to increase sewer capacity; reducing combined sewage 
overflows from 50 to 60 per year, to 2 to 3 per year.10 
In order to assess how changing rainfall patterns 
might affect sewer capacity in the future, Milwaukee 
was one of the first cities to integrate regional climate 
projections into its detailed engineering models. Under 
a future climate scenario (for 2050) that had one of 
the largest projected increases in spring rain, a 37% 
increase in the number of combined sewage overflows 
in spring was projected, resulting in an overall 20% 
increase from the baseline in the volume of discharge 
each year.76  

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
165
surface temperatures, particularly in coastal waters, which gen­
erally have high levels of the dissolved organic carbon required 
for Vibrio growth. The distribution of species changes with salin­
ity patterns related to sea level rise and to changes in delivery of 
freshwater to coastal waters, which is affected by flooding and 
drought. For instance, V. parahaeomolyticus and V. alginolyticus 
favor higher salinities while V. vulnificus favors more moderate 
salinities.95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100 
Harmful algal blooms caused by cyanobacteria were responsible 
for nearly half of all reported outbreaks in untreated recreation­
al freshwater in 2009 and 2010, resulting in approximately 61 
illnesses (health effects included dermatologic, gastrointestinal, 
respiratory, and neurologic symptoms), primarily reported in 
children/young adults age 1–19.101 Cyanobacterial blooms are 
strongly influenced by rising temperatures, altered precipitation 
patterns, and changes in freshwater discharge or flushing rates 
of water bodies (Table 1).102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108 Higher tempera­
tures (77°F and greater) favor surface-bloom-forming cyano­
bacteria over less harmful types of algae.109 In marine water, 
the toxins associated with harmful “red tide” blooms of Karenia 
brevis can aerosolize in water droplets through wind and wave 
action and cause acute respiratory illness and eye irritation in 
recreational beachgoers.110, 111 People with preexisting respi­
ratory diseases, specifically asthma, are at increased risk of 
illness.112, 113 Prevailing winds and storms are important climate 
factors influencing the accumulation of K. brevis cells in the wa­
ter.78, 114 For example, in 1996, Tropical Storm Josephine trans­
ported a Florida panhandle bloom as far west as Louisiana,115 
the first documented occurrence of K. brevis in that state. 
Projected Changes
Overall, climate change will contribute to contamination 
of recreational waters and increased exposure to agents of 
water-related illness.10, 82, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 Increases in flooding, 
coastal inundation, and nuisance flooding (linked to sea level 
rise and storm surge from changing patterns of coastal storms 
and hurricanes) will negatively affect coastal infrastructure and 
increase chances for pathogen contamination, especially in 
populated areas (see also Ch. 4: Extreme Events).70, 121 In areas 
where increasing temperatures lengthen the seasons for recre­
ational swimming and other water activities, exposure risks are 
expected to increase.122, 123 
As average temperatures rise, the seasonal and geographic 
range of suitable habitat for cyanobacterial species is projected 
to expand.124, 125, 126, 127, 128 For example, tropical and subtropical 
species like Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, Anabaena spp., and 
Aphanizomenon spp. have already shown poleward expan­
sion into mid-latitudes of Europe, North America, and South 
America.107, 129, 130 Increasing variability in precipitation patterns 
and more frequent and intense extreme precipitation events 
(which will increase nutrient loading) will also affect cyanobac­
terial communities. If such events are followed by extended 
drought periods, the stagnant, low-flow conditions accompa­
nying droughts will favor cyanobacterial dominance and bloom 
formation.103, 131 
In recreational waters, projected increases in sea surface 
temperatures are expected to lengthen the seasonal window 
of growth and expand geographic range of Vibrio species,96, 
132 although the certainty of regional projections is affected by 
underlying model structure.133 While the specific response of 
Vibrio and degree of growth may vary by species and locale, 
in general, longer seasons and expansion of Vibrio into areas 
where it had not previously been will increase the likelihood 
of exposure to Vibrio in recreational waters. Regional climate 
changes that affect coastal salinity (such as flooding, drought, 
and sea level rise) can also affect the population dynamics of 
these agents,97, 99, 134 with implications for human exposure risk. 
Increases in hurricane intensity and rainfall are projected as the 
climate continues to warm (see Ch 4: Extreme Events). Such 
increases may redistribute toxic blooms of K. brevis (“red tide” 
blooms) into new geographic locations, which would change 
human exposure risk in newly affected areas. 
Fish and Shellfish
Water-related contaminants as well as naturally occurring 
harmful bacteria and algae can be accumulated by fish or 
shellfish, providing a route of human exposure through 
consumption (see also Ch. 7: Food Safety).135, 136, 137 Shellfish, 
including oysters, are often consumed raw or very lightly 
cooked, which increases the potential for ingestion of an infec­
tious pathogen.138 
Pathogens Associated with Fish and Shellfish
Enteric viruses (for example, noroviruses and hepatitis A virus) 
found in sewage are the primary causes of gastrointestinal 
illness due to shellfish consumption.139, 140 Rainfall increases 
the load of contaminants associated with sewage delivered to 
shellfish harvesting waters and may also temporarily reduce 
salinity, which can increase persistence of many enteric bac­
teria and viruses.141, 142, 143, 144 Many enteric viruses also exhibit 
In areas where increasing temperatures lengthen recreational 
swimming seasons, exposure risks are expected to increase.

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
166
seasonal patterns in infection rates and detection rates in the 
environment, which may be related to temperature.145, 146, 147 
Among naturally occurring water-related pathogens, Vibrio 
vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus are the species most often 
implicated in foodborne illness in the United States, account­
ing for more than 50% of reported shellfish-related illnesses 
annually.140, 148, 149, 150, 151 Cases have increased significantly since 
1996.92, 148 Rising sea surface temperatures have contributed 
to an expanded geographic and seasonal range in outbreaks 
associated with shellfish.96, 152, 153, 154, 155 
Precipitation is expected to be the primary climate driver 
affecting enteric pathogen loading to shellfish harvesting areas, 
although temperature also affects bioaccumulation rates of 
enteric viruses in shellfish. There are currently no national pro­
jections for the associated risk of illness from shellfish consump­
tion. Many local and state agencies have developed plans for 
closing shellfish beds in the event of threshold-exceeding rain 
events that lead to loading of these contaminants and deterio­
ration of water quality.156 
Importance: Vibrio species are naturally occurring pathogens in coastal environments that cause illnesses 
ranging from gastroenteritis to septicemia (bloodstream infection) and death from both water contact and 
ingestion of raw or undercooked seafood, especially shellfish.93 Vibrio are highly responsive to environmental 
conditions. For example, local 
nutrient availability can affect Vibrio 
abundance, though coastal waters 
generally have sufficient levels of the 
dissolved organic carbon required for 
Vibrio growth.159 
Over longer timescales and larger 
geographic areas, key climate-related 
factors that increase Vibrio growth 
and abundance include rising sea 
surface temperatures and changes 
in precipitation, freshwater runoff, 
drought, sea level rise, coastal 
flooding, and storm surge, with 
resulting changes to coastal salinity 
patterns, turbidity (water clarity), and 
plankton abundance and composition 
(see Figure 1).95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 134, 160, 
161, 162, 163 
Water temperature is a major 
contributor to Vibrio growth potential 
and, in turn, human exposure risk. 
The minimum water temperature 
threshold for the growth of most 
Vibrio species that cause illness in 
humans is 15°C (59°F), with growth 
rates increasing as temperature 
increases.132, 152, 154, 157 Thus, it is 
projected that global ocean warming 
will increase risk of exposure by 
extending seasonal windows of 
growth and geographical range of 
occurrence.132 
Projections of Vibrio Occurrence and Abundance in 
Chesapeake Bay 
Figure 4: Seasonal and decadal projections of abundance of V. parahaemolyticus 
in oysters of Chesapeake Bay (top) and probability of occurrence of V. vulnificus 
in Chesapeake Bay surface waters (bottom). The circles show average values in 
the baseline period (1985–2000) and future years averaged by decadal period: 
2030 (2025–2034), 2050 (2045–2054), and 2095 (2090–2099). (Figure source: 
adapted from Jacobs et al. 2015).132
Research Highlight: The Effect of Warming on Seasonal Vibrio Abundance and Distribution

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
167
Research Highlight: The Effect of Warming on Seasonal Vibrio Abundance and Distribution, continued 
Objective: A quantitative projection of future shifts in Vibrio seasonal abundance and geographic range.
Method: Monthly average sea surface temperatures were projected for the 2030s, 2050s, and 2090s based 
on statistical downscaling of up to 21 global climate models for the Chesapeake Bay and Alaskan coastline. 
Previously published empirical models relating sea surface temperature and salinity to Vibrio vulnificus and 
V. parahaemolyticus were used to project probability of occurrence and abundance in Chesapeake Bay waters 
and oysters. Geographic information system (GIS) mapping of Alaskan coastal waters was used to project the 
distribution of monthly 
average water temperatures 
exceeding 15°C (59°F), 
considered to be the 
minimum temperature 
favorable for growth.132
Results and Conclusions: 
Modeling results find 
increases in abundance, 
geographical range, and 
seasonal extent of available 
habitat for Vibrio. In the 
Chesapeake Bay, the 
probability of occurrence of 
V. vulnificus is projected to 
increase by nearly 16% in 
the shoulder months of the 
growing season (May and 
September), with a similar 
increase in abundance of V. 
parahaemolyticus in oysters 
(Figure 4). 
Analysis of temperature 
projections for Alaskan coastal 
waters based on an average of 
four climate models showed 
that habitat availability for 
Vibrio growth will increase to 
nearly 60% of the Alaskan 
shoreline in August by the 
2090s (Figure 5). 
Sources of uncertainty include 
different rates of warming 
associated with each model 
ensemble and other factors 
that affect growth and 
abundance, but all models 
used in this study project 
warming of coastal waters.
Changes in Suitable Coastal Vibrio Habitat in Alaska 
Figure 5: Vibrio growth increases in temperatures above 15°C (59°F). These maps show 
the low and high end of the ranges for projected area of Alaskan coastline with water 
temperature averages in August that are greater than this threshold. The projections were 
made for the following future time periods: 2030 (2026–2035), 2050 (2046–2055), and 
2090 (2086–2095). On average, the models project that by 2090, nearly 60% of the 
Alaskan shoreline in August will become suitable Vibrio habitat. (Figure source: adapted 
from Jacobs et al. 2015)132

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
168
Increases in sea surface temperatures, changes in precipitation 
and freshwater delivery to coastal waters, and sea level rise will 
continue to affect Vibrio growth and are expected to increase 
human exposure risk.96, 134, 152, 157 Regional models project in­
creased abundance and extended seasonal windows of growth 
of Vibrio pathogens (see Research Highlight on page 166).132 
The magnitude of health impacts depends on the use of inter­
vention strategies and on public and physician awareness.158
Harmful Algal Toxins
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) that contaminate seafood with 
toxins are becoming increasingly frequent and persistent in 
coastal marine waters, and some have expanded into new 
geographic locations.164, 165, 166, 167, 168 Attribution of this trend 
has been complicated for some species, with evidence to 
suggest that human-induced changes (such as ballast water 
exchange, aquaculture, nutrient loading to coastal waters, and 
climate change) have contribut­
ed to this expansion.167, 169
Among HABs associated with 
seafood, ciguatera fish poisoning 
(CFP) is most strongly influ­
enced by climate.170, 171, 172 CFP 
is caused by toxins produced by 
the benthic algae Gambierdiscus 
(Table 1) and is the most frequently reported fish poisoning 
in humans.173 There is a well-established link between warm 
sea surface temperatures and increased occurrences of CFP,170, 
171, 172 and in some cases, increases have also been linked to El 
Niño–Southern Oscillation events.174 The frequency of tropical 
cyclones in the United States has also been associated with 
CFP, but with an 18-month lag period associated with the time 
required for a new Gambierdiscus habitat to develop.170, 171 
Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) is the most globally wide­
spread shellfish poisoning associated with algal toxins,175 
and records of PSP toxins in shellfish tissues (an indicator of 
toxin-producing species of Alexandrium) provide the longest 
time series in the United States for evaluating climate impacts. 
Warm phases of the naturally occurring climate pattern known 
as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation co-occur with increased 
PSP toxins in Puget Sound shellfish on decadal timescales.176 
Further, it is very likely that the 20th century warming trend 
also contributed to the observed increase in shellfish toxicity 
since the 1950s.177, 178 Warm spring temperatures also contrib­
uted to a bloom of Alexandrium in a coastal New York estuary 
in 2008.179 Decadal patterns in PSP toxins in Gulf of Maine 
shellfish show no clear relationships with long-term trends in 
climate,180, 181, 182 but ocean–climate interactions and changing 
oceanographic conditions are important factors for under­
standing Alexandrium bloom dynamics in this region.183
There is less agreement on the extent of climate impacts 
on other marine HAB-related diseases in the United States. 
Increased abundances of Pseudo-nitzschia species, which 
can cause amnesic shellfish poisoning, have been attributed 
to nutrient enrichment in the Gulf of Mexico.184 On the U.S. 
West Coast, increased abundances of at least some species of 
Pseudo-nitzschia occur during warm phases associated with El 
Niño events.185 For Dinophysis species that can cause diarrhet­
ic shellfish poisoning, data records are too short to evaluate 
potential relationships with climate in the United States,164, 186 
but studies in Sweden have found relationships with natural 
climate oscillations.187 
The projected impacts of climate change on toxic marine 
harmful algae include geographic range changes in both 
warm- and cold-water species, changes in abundance and 
toxicity, and changes in the timing of the seasonal window 
of growth.188, 189, 190, 191 These impacts will likely result from 
climate change related impacts on one or more of 1) water 
temperatures, 2) salinities, 3) 
enhanced surface stratification, 
4) nutrient availability and sup­
ply to coastal waters (upwelling 
and freshwater runoff), and 
5) altered winds and ocean 
currents.188, 190, 191, 192, 193 
Limited understanding of the 
interactions among climate and non-climate stressors and, in 
some cases, limitations in the design of experiments for in­
vestigating decadal- or century-scale trends in phytoplankton 
communities, makes forecasting the direction and magnitude 
of change in toxic marine HABs challenging.189, 191 Still, changes 
to the community composition of marine microalgae, includ­
ing harmful species, will occur.188, 194 Conditions for the growth 
of dinoflagellates—the algal group containing numerous toxic 
species—could potentially be increasingly favorable with 
climate change because these species possess certain physi­
ological characteristics that allow them to take advantage of 
climatically-driven changes in the structure of the ocean (for 
example, stronger vertical stratification and reduced turbu­
lence).190, 193, 195, 196, 197 
Climate change, especially continued warming, will dramati­
cally increase the burden of some marine HAB-related diseas­
es in some parts of the United States, with strong implications 
for disease surveillance and public health preparedness. For 
example, the projected 4.5°F to 6.3°F increase in sea surface 
temperature in the Caribbean over the coming century is 
expected to increase the incidence of ciguatera fish poisoning 
by 200% to 400%.171 In Puget Sound, warming is projected 
to increase the seasonal window of growth for Alexandrium 
by approximately 30 days by 2040, allowing blooms to begin 
earlier in the year and persist for longer.177, 190, 198 
Climate change, especially continued warming, 
will dramatical­ly increase the burden of some 
marine HAB-related diseases in some parts 
of the United States

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
169
Research Highlight: Increased Risk of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning (CFP)
Importance: Ciguatera fish poisoning is caused by consumption of fish contaminated with toxins produced by 
dinoflagellates, such as those of the genus Gambierdiscus. There is a well-established link between warm sea 
surface temperatures and increased occurrence of CFP,171 and thus concern that global ocean warming will 
affect the risk of illness.
Objective: A quantitative projection of future shifts in species of Gambierdiscus. 
Method: Growth models developed for three Caribbean species of Gambierdiscus were run using 11 global 
climate model projections for specific buoy locations in the western Gulf of Mexico, Yucatan channel, and 
eastern Caribbean Sea through 2099. For further detail, see Kibler et al. 2015.199
Results and Conclusions: Modeling results suggest substantial changes in dominant species composition (Figure 
6). Lower thermal tolerances of some species may result in geographic range shifts to more northern latitudes, 
particularly from the Yucatan and eastern Caribbean Sea. The projected shift in distribution is likely to mean 
that dominant CFP toxins enter the marine food web through different species, with increases of toxins in new 
areas where waters are warming and potential decreases in existing areas where waters are warming less rapidly.
Figure 6: Water temperature data from 1990–2013 were collected or reconstructed for buoy sites in the western 
Gulf of Mexico, Yucatan channel, and eastern Caribbean Sea. These data were then used in calculations to 
project average annual water temperature and average growth rates for three Caribbean Gambierdiscus species 
(G. caribaeus, G. belizeanus, G. carolinianus) for the period 2014–2099. (Figure source: adapted from Kibler et 
al. 2015).199
Projected Changes in Caribbean Gambierdiscus Species

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
170
infrastructure, and various environmental, political, economic, 
and social factors jointly create these disparities.201  
Children, older adults (primarily age 65 and older), pregnant 
women, and immunocompromised individuals have higher risk 
of gastrointestinal illness and severe health outcomes from con­
tact with contaminated water.4, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213 Pregnant women 
who develop severe gastrointestinal illness are at high risk for 
adverse pregnancy outcomes (pregnancy loss and preterm 
birth).214 Because children swallow roughly twice as much 
water as adults while swimming, they have higher recreational 
exposure risk for both pathogens and freshwater HABs.101, 120 
Recent cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis cases have frequently 
been reported in children aged one to nine years, with onset of 
illness peaking during the summer months.215 In addition, 40% 
Research Highlight: Expanded Seasonal Windows for Harmful Algal Blooms
Importance: When some harmful algae in the 
genus Alexandrium bloom, toxins that can 
accumulate in shellfish are produced. When 
these shellfish are consumed, gastrointestinal 
illness and neurological symptoms, known 
as paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), can 
occur. Death can result in extreme cases. 
Because growth of Alexandrium is regulated 
in part by water temperature, warm water 
conditions appropriate for bloom formation 
may expand seasonally, increasing the risk of 
illness.
Objective: A quantitative projection of future 
conditions appropriate for Alexandrium bloom 
formation in Puget Sound. 
Method: Monthly average sea surface 
temperature was projected for Quartermaster 
Harbor, Puget Sound, for the 2030s, 2050s, 
and 2090s based on statistical downscaling 
of 21 global climate models. The projections 
were applied to previously published 
empirical models relating temperature and 
salinity to Alexandrium growth. For more 
detail, see Jacobs et al. 2015.132
Results and Conclusions: Modeling results indicate that Alexandrium blooms could develop up to two months earlier 
in the year and persist for up to two months longer by 2100 compared to the present day (Figure 7). All model 
projections indicate that the bloom season will expand by at least one month on either side of the present-day bloom 
season by 2100. Therefore, it is likely that the risk of Alexandrium blooms that can contaminate shellfish with potent 
toxins will increase. This may increase the risk of human exposure to the toxins, which can cause paralytic shellfish 
poisoning. Sources of uncertainty include different rates of warming associated with each model ensemble and other 
factors that affect growth and abundance, but all models used project warming of coastal waters.
Figure 7: Seasonal and decadal projections of growth of Alexandrium 
in Puget Sound. The circles show average values in the baseline period 
(2006–2013) and future years averaged by decadal period: 2030 (2025–
2035), 2050 (2045–2055), and 2095 (2090–2099). Growth rate values 
above 0.25μd-1 constitute a bloom of Alexandrium (Figure source: adapted 
from Jacobs et al. 2015)132
Projections of Growth of Alexandrium in Puget Sound
6.4	 Populations of Concern
Climate change impacts on the drinking water exposure path­
way (see page 163) will act as an additional stressor on top of 
existing exposure disparities in the United States. Lack of consis­
tent access to potable drinking water and inequities in exposure 
to contaminated water disproportionately affects the following 
populations: tribes and Alaska Natives, especially those in 
remote reservations or villages; residents of low-income rural 
subdivisions known as colonias along the U.S.–Mexico border; 
migrant farm workers; the homeless; and low-income commu­
nities not served by public water utilities—which can be urban, 
suburban, or rural, and some of which are predominately His­
panic or Latino and Black or African American communities in 
certain regions of the country.200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208 In gen­
eral, the heightened vulnerability of these populations primar­
ily results from unequal access to adequate water and sewer 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
171
of swimming-related eye and ear infections from Vibrio algino­
lyticus during the period 1997−2006 were reported in children 
(median age of 15).93
Traditional tribal consumption of fish and shellfish in the Pacif­
ic Northwest and Alaska can be on average 3 to 10 times high­
er than that of average U.S. consumers, or even up to 20 times 
higher.216 Climate change will contribute to increased seafood 
contamination by toxins and potentially by chemical contami­
nants (see "6.5 Emerging Issues" below), with potential health 
risks and cultural implications for tribal communities. Those 
who continue to consume traditional diets may face increased 
health risks from contamination.217 Alternatively, replacing 
these traditional nutrition sources may involve consuming less 
nutritious processed foods and the loss of cultural practices 
tied to fish and shellfish harvest.218, 219
6.5	 Emerging Issues
A key emerging issue is the impact of climate on new and 
re-emerging pathogens. While cases of nearly-always-fatal 
primary amoebic meningoencephalitis due to the amoeba 
Naegleria fowleri and other related species remain relatively 
uncommon, a northward expansion of cases has been ob­
served in the last five years.220, 221 Evidence suggests that in 
addition to detection in source water (ground and surface 
waters), these amoebae may be harbored in biofilms associat­
ed with water distribution systems, where increased tempera­
tures decrease efficacy of chlorine disinfection and support 
survival and potentially growth.222, 223, 224
Climate change may also alter the patterns or magnitude of 
chemical contamination of seafood, leading to altered effects 
on human health—most of which are chronic conditions. 
Rising temperatures and reduced ice cover are already linked 
to increasing burdens of mercury and organohalogens in arctic 
fish,225 a sign of increasing contamination of the arctic food 
chain. Changes in hydrology resulting from climate change 
are expected to alter releases of chemical contaminants into 
the Nation’s surface waters,226 with as-yet-unknown effects on 
seafood contamination. 
6.6	 Research Needs
In addition to those identified in the emerging issues discus­
sion above, the authors highlight the following potential areas 
for additional scientific and research activity on water-relat­
ed illness, based on their review of the literature. Enhanced 
understanding of climate change impacts will be facilitated by 
improved public health surveillance for water-related infec­
tious diseases and expanded monitoring and surveillance 
of surface and coastal water quality. In addition, improved 
understanding of how human behaviors affect the risk of wa­
terborne diseases can facilitate the development of predictive 
models and effective adaptation measures. Predictive models 
can also help identify major areas of uncertainty and refine 
key research questions.
Future assessments can benefit from research activities that
•	 assess the interactions among climate drivers, ecosystem 
changes, water quality and infectious pathogens, including 
Vibrio spp., N. fowlerii, chemical contaminants, and harmful 
algal blooms;
•	 increase understanding of how marine and terrestrial wild­
life, including waterfowl, contribute to the distribution of 
pathogens and transmission of infectious disease and assess 
the role of climate;
•	 explore how ocean acidification affects toxin production and 
distribution of marine HABs and pathogens;
•	 analyze the hydrologic (discharge, flow-residence time, and 
mixing) thresholds for predicting HAB occurrences; and
•	 increase understanding of how the impacts of climate 
change on drinking water infrastructure, including the need 
for development of new and emerging technologies for 
provision of drinking water, affect the risks of waterborne 
diseases.
Water-related contamination of shellfish may reduce 
consumption and contribute to loss of tribal cultural practices 
tied to shellfish harvest.

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
172
Supporting Evidence
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING CHAPTER
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. Authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the 
overall report process, see Appendices 2 and 3.
Many water-related illnesses are of critical importance 
globally, such as cholera and hepatitis E virus, and they affect 
U.S. interests abroad, but the focus of this chapter is to 
address climate impacts on water-related illnesses of primary 
importance to human health within the United States. In 
addition, although climate change has the potential to impact 
national as well as global seafood supplies, this chapter does 
not cover these types of impacts because the peer-reviewed 
literature is not yet robust enough to make connections to 
human health outcomes in the United States. Even with those 
constraints, the impacts of climate on water-related illness are 
regionally or locally specific and may include increased risks 
as well as benefits. For example, the projected geographic 
range shifts of some Gambieridiscus species to more northern 
latitudes may mean that dominant ciguatera fish poisoning 
toxins enter the marine food web through different species, 
with increases of toxins in new areas where waters are 
warming and potential decreases in areas such as the Yucatan 
and eastern Caribbean Sea.199  
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Seasonal and Geographic Changes in Waterborne 
Illness Risk

Key Finding 1: Increases in water temperatures associated 
with climate change will alter the seasonal windows of 
growth and the geographic range of suitable habitat for 
freshwater toxin-producing harmful algae [Very Likely, High 
Confidence], certain naturally occurring Vibrio bacteria [Very 
Likely, Medium Confidence], and marine toxin-producing 
harmful algae [Likely, Medium Confidence]. These changes 
will increase the risk of exposure to waterborne pathogens 
and algal toxins that can cause a variety of illnesses [Medium 
Confidence].
Description of evidence base
Vibrio, a genus of naturally occurring waterborne pathogens, 
thrives in water temperatures above a 15°C/59°F threshold.132, 
152, 154, 157 Rising sea surface temperatures have contributed to 
an expanded geographic and seasonal range in outbreaks of 
human illness associated with Vibrio in shellfish.96, 152, 153, 154, 
155 In recreational waters, projected increases in sea surface 
temperatures are expected to lengthen the seasonal window 
of growth and expand geographic range of Vibrio.96, 132 Like 
other heterotrophic bacteria, growth of Vibrio is ultimately 
limited by availability of carbon substrate, though the coastal 
areas where Vibrio exposure is most likely, either through 
recreation or consumption of shellfish, generally have 
sufficient dissolved organic carbon.159 Reported rates of all 
Vibrio infections have tripled since 1996 in the United States, 
with V. alginolyticus infections having increased by 40-fold.92 
Increasing sea surface temperatures, changes in precipitation 
and freshwater delivery to coastal waters, and sea level rise 
will continue to affect Vibrio growth and are expected to 
increase human exposure.96, 134, 152, 157
Most harmful algae, including freshwater cyanobacteria that 
can contaminate drinking water and marine dinoflagellate 
species that can contaminate fish and shellfish with natural 
toxins, thrive during the warm summer season or when water 
temperatures are higher than usual. As the climate continues 
to warm, water temperatures will rise above thresholds that 
promote bloom development earlier in the spring and will 
persist longer into the fall and expand into higher latitudes. 
This will result in a longer seasonal window and expanded 
geographic range for human exposure into higher latitudes.124, 
125, 126, 127, 128, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193 Climate change, especially 
continued warming, will increase the burden of some marine 
HAB-related diseases, particularly ciguatera fish poisoning, in 
some regions of the United States. 
Major uncertainties
Uncertainty remains regarding the relative importance of 
additional factors that may also act on naturally occurring 
pathogens and harmful algae at local or regional levels to 
influence their growth, distribution, and toxicity. In many 
cases, it is uncertain how these multiple factors may interact 
with each other to influence the seasonal windows and 
geographic range for pathogens and harmful algae, especially 
in dynamic coastal marine environments. For example, 
changes in salinity, competition with other plankton, and 
presence of viruses or other organisms that consume 
plankton or bacteria can affect abundance.162, 163 Changing 
distribution patterns for some marine species of harmful 
algae is not well understood and some regions may become 
too warm for certain species of harmful algae to grow, 
shifting (without changing in total size) or even shrinking their 
geographic range.
Additionally, there are limited studies on projections for 
changes in illness rates due to naturally occurring waterborne 
pathogens and harmful algae. Uncertainty remains regarding 
appropriate methods for projecting changes in illness rates, 
including how to integrate considerations of human behavior 
into modeling (current methods to assess exposure risk 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
173
assume similar human behavior across time scales and 
geography). Methodological challenges are related to 1) 
underreporting and underdiagnosis of cases that affect the 
accuracy of baseline estimates of illness, 2) ability to project 
changes in strain virulence, 3) accounting for the effects of 
potential adaptation strategies/public health interventions 
(for example, public service announcements on how to avoid 
exposure), and 4) accounting for changes in public healthcare 
infrastructure and access that can reduce the risk of exposure 
or illness/death if exposed.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is medium confidence 
that, with changing climate, the annual seasonal and the 
geographic range for Vibrio and certain marine harmful algae 
will expand. The assessment of medium confidence is due to 
less certainty from modeling results regarding the magnitude 
of projected changes in abundance. The conclusions were 
deemed very likely to occur for Vibrio and likely for marine 
harmful algae based on good levels of agreement found in the 
published quantitative modeling projections for both Vibrio 
and marine harmful algae (Alexandrium and Gambieridiscus) 
cited above. This conclusion takes into consideration that 
for some marine algae (for example, Gambieridiscus), lower 
latitudes may become too warm and risk may decline in 
those areas as it increases at higher latitudes. For freshwater 
harmful algae, there is high confidence that annual season 
and geographic range will expand with changing climate, 
which will also prolong the time for exposure and the 
potential for public health impacts. Consistent and high-
quality evidence from a limited number of laboratory 
studies, modeling efforts, field surveys, and comparisons 
of historic and contemporary conditions support this 
assessment. The conclusion was deemed very likely to occur 
for freshwater harmful algae with high confidence based 
on laboratory studies and field observations, as well as a 
greater fundamental understanding of inland hydrodynamics 
and bloom ecology as indicated in the literature cited in the 
chapter. There is medium confidence regarding increased risk 
to human health from a longer potential time for exposure 
to waterborne pathogens and algal toxins and potential 
exposure for a wider (or novel) population. This confidence 
level was chosen due to less certainty stemming from a 
relative lack of quantitative data and projections for future 
illness rates in the peer-reviewed literature.
Runoff from Extreme Precipitation Increases Exposure 
Risk
Key Finding 2: Runoff from more frequent and intense 
extreme precipitation events will increasingly compromise 
recreational waters, shellfish harvesting waters, and 
sources of drinking water through increased introduction 
of pathogens and prevalence of toxic algal blooms [High 
Confidence]. As a result, the risk of human exposure to agents 
of water-related illness will increase [Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
Extreme precipitation can mobilize pathogens, nutrients, 
and chemical contaminants from agricultural, wildlife, and 
urban sources. Waterborne illness and outbreaks from 
pathogens following heavy precipitation events have been 
well documented in multiple studies using both passive 
and active surveillance on a local and regional level.38, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 Likewise, extreme precipitation events and 
subsequent increases in runoff are key climate factors 
that increase nutrient loading in freshwater and marine 
recreational waters, shellfish harvesting waters, and sources 
of drinking water, which in turn increases the likelihood 
of harmful cyanobacterial blooms that produce algal 
toxins.56 The drinking water treatment process can remove 
cyanobacterial blooms; however, efficacy of the treatment 
processes may vary from 60% to 99.9%. Ineffective treatment 
could compromise water quality and may lead to severe 
treatment disruption or treatment plant shutdown.53, 54, 55, 56 
More frequent and intense extreme precipitation events are 
projected for many regions in the United States as climate 
changes. Consistent, high-quality evidence from multiple 
studies supports a finding that increased runoff and flooding 
events are expected to increase contamination of source 
waters (for drinking water supply) and surface waters used 
for recreation, which may increase people’s exposure to 
pathogens and algal toxins that cause illness.10, 52, 59, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
76, 82, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 Other factors may modify these risks, such 
as increased air or water temperatures, residence time in the 
environment, lower water levels, or dilution. 
Major uncertainties
Changes in exposure and risk are attributable to many factors 
in addition to climate. While extreme precipitation and 
flooding events introduce contaminants and pathogens to 
water to varying degrees depending on the characteristics 
of each individual event, they may not always result in 
increases in exposure due to planning and adaptive actions. 
There are limited studies on actual projections for changes 
in illness rates due to increasing frequency or intensity 
of extreme precipitation events. Uncertainty remains 
regarding appropriate methods for projecting changes in 
illness rates, including how to integrate considerations of 
human behavior into modeling (current methods to assess 
exposure risk assume similar human behavior across time 
scales and geography). Methodological challenges are related 
to 1) baseline case reporting issues (underreporting and 
underdiagnosis), 2) accounting for the effects of potential 
adaptation strategies/public health interventions (for 
example, public service announcements about how to avoid 
exposure), and 3) accounting for changes in public healthcare 
infrastructure and access that can reduce the risk of exposure 
or of illness/death if exposed.

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
174
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is high confidence that 
increasing frequency or intensity of extreme precipitation 
events will compromise recreational waters and sources 
of drinking water with pathogens, nutrients, and chemical 
contaminants from agricultural, wildlife, and urban sources.
There is consistent qualitative evidence that flooding 
associated with extreme precipitation events and storm 
surge results in loading of pathogens and nutrients to surface 
and groundwater (and drinking water distribution systems) 
through stormwater runoff and sewage overflows. However, 
other human and social factors modify risk, and there are 
no national-level studies upon which to draw conclusions 
regarding quantitative projections of increased exposure. 
Thus, the limited number of studies supports a medium 
confidence level that human exposure risk will increase due 
to changes in extreme events.
Water Infrastructure Failure 
Key Finding 3: Increases in some extreme weather events 
and storm surges will increase the risk that infrastructure for 
drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater will fail due to 
either damage or exceedance of system capacity, especially in 
areas with aging infrastructure [High Confidence]. As a result, 
the risk of exposure to water-related pathogens, chemicals, 
and algal toxins will increase in recreational and shellfish 
harvesting waters and in drinking water where treatment 
barriers break down [Medium Confidence]. 
Description of evidence base
Water infrastructure in the United States is aging and may be 
inadequate or deteriorating. Combined sewers in many older 
cities were not designed to handle extreme precipitation 
events that are becoming more frequent with climate 
change. Multiple studies provide consistent, high-quality 
evidence that these systems are at risk of being overwhelmed 
during flood events or may be further damaged during 
other extreme weather events (e.g., storm surge), allowing 
contaminated surface water to run off into drinking water 
and recreational water sources.10, 52, 59, 70, 76, 116 Drinking water 
source contamination may be exacerbated or insufficiently 
addressed by treatment processes at the plant or the 
distribution system. Drinking water treatment plants may be 
challenged by high pathogen loads and toxic cyanobacterial 
bloom events.52, 55, 56 Multiple studies support a finding that 
climate change will place additional stresses on the capacity 
of drinking water treatment facilities and may increase the 
risk that water infrastructure, especially aging infrastructure, 
will fail through either damage or exceedance of system 
capacity.6, 70, 74, 75  
Major uncertainties
The human health consequences of aging water infrastructure 
failure depend not only on the local and regional climate 
factors that contribute to damage or capacity challenges 
but also the nature of the system and the pressures on it, 
the population affected, and the timeliness and adequacy of 
the response—all of which are inherently local or regional 
factors. Due to the complicated local and regional specificity, 
there are no national projections of the human health 
impact of water infrastructure failure. Uncertainty remains 
regarding appropriate methods for projecting changes in 
illness rates, including how to integrate considerations of 
human behavior into modeling (current methods to assess 
exposure risk assume similar human behavior across time 
scales and geography). Methodological challenges are related 
to 1) baseline case reporting issues (underreporting and 
underdiagnosis), 2) accounting for the effects of potential 
adaptation strategies/public health interventions (for 
example, mitigating risk with improvements to current water 
and sewerage systems), and 3) accounting for changes in 
public healthcare infrastructure and access that can reduce 
the risk of exposure or of illness/death if exposed.
Assessment of confidence based on evidence
Based on the evidence found in the peer-reviewed literature, 
there is high confidence that the anticipated climate change 
related increases in some extreme weather events and in 
storm surge will increase the risk that water infrastructure for 
drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater will fail through 
either damage or exceedance of system capacity, with aging 
infrastructure being particularly vulnerable. Evidence shows 
contamination to or from these systems occurs with heavy 
precipitation and other extreme weather events. There is 
consistent qualitative evidence suggesting that projected 
climate change effects on extreme weather patterns—
particularly extreme precipitation and storm surge—can 
adversely affect water infrastructure and lead to increased 
loading of pathogens, algal toxins, and contaminants. 
However, there are no national-level studies upon which 
to draw conclusions regarding quantitative projections of 
increased exposure. Thus, the limited number of studies 
supports a medium confidence level regarding risk of 
exposure.

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
175
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
This assessment relies on two metrics to communicate 
the degree of certainty in Key Findings. See Appendix 4: 
Documenting Uncertainty for more on assessments of 
likelihood and confidence.
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 157–Hands cupping water: © iStockPhotos.com/
jacky9946 
Pg. 158–Young women walking through floodwater: 
© Richard Ellis/Corbis
Pg. 163–Heavy rain: © iStockPhoto.com/AndreasWeber 
Pg. 165–Family jumping in lake: © Juice Images/Corbis
Pg. 171–Razor clam dig: Courtesy of Vera Trainer/NOAA 
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
176
1.	
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 
2.	
Colford, J.M., Jr., S. Roy, M.J. Beach, A. Hightower, S.E. 
Shaw, and T.J. Wade, 2006: A review of household drinking 
water intervention trials and an approach to the estimation 
of endemic waterborne gastroenteritis in the United States. 
Journal of Water and Health, 4 Suppl 2, 71-88.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.2166/wh.2006.018 
3.	
Messner, M., S. Shaw, S. Regli, K. Rotert, V. Blank, and J. 
Soller, 2006: An approach for developing a national estimate 
of waterborne disease due to drinking water and a national 
estimate model application. Journal of Water and Health, 4 
Suppl 2, 201-240.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wh.2006.024 
4.	
Reynolds, K.A., K.D. Mena, and C.P. Gerba, 2008: Risk of 
waterborne illness via drinking water in the United States. 
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 192, 
117-158.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-71724-1_4 
5.	
Soller, J.A., T. Bartrand, N.J. Ashbolt, J. Ravenscroft, and 
T.J. Wade, 2010: Estimating the primary etiologic agents in 
recreational freshwaters impacted by human sources of fae­
cal contamination. Water Research, 44, 4736-4747.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.07.064 
6.	
Beach, M.J., S. Roy, J. Brunkard, J. Yoder, and M.C. Hlav­
sa, 2009: The changing epidemiology of waterborne disease 
outbreaks in the United States: Implications for system infra­
structure and future planning. Global Issues in Water, Sanita­
tion, and Health: Workshop Summary. Institute of Medicine. 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 156-168. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.17226/12658 
7.	
Scallan, E., R.M. Hoekstra, F.J. Angulo, R.V. Tauxe, M.A. 
Widdowson, S.L. Roy, J.L. Jones, and P.M. Griffin, 2011: 
Foodborne illness acquired in the United States: Major 
pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17, 7-15.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.P11101 
8.	
EPA, 2004: Report to Congress: Impacts and Control of 
CSOs and SSOs. EPA 833-R-04-001. U.S. Environmen­
tal Protection Agency, Office of Water, Washington, D.C. 
http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/cso/2004-Report-to-
Congress.cfm
9.	
Montserrat, A., L. Bosch, M.A. Kiser, M. Poch, and L. Cor­
ominas, 2015: Using data from monitoring combined sewer 
overflows to assess, improve, and maintain combined sewer 
systems. Science of the Total Environment, 505, 1053-1061. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.10.087 
10.	 Patz, J.A., S.J. Vavrus, C.K. Uejio, and S.L. McLellan, 
2008: Climate change and waterborne disease risk in the 
Great Lakes region of the US. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 35, 451-458.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ame­
pre.2008.08.026 
11.	 EPA, 2008: A Screening Assessment of the Potential Impacts 
of Climate Change on Combined Sewer Overflow Mit­
igation in the Great Lakes and New England Regions. 
EPA/600/R-07/033F, 50 pp. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, D.C. http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/
recordisplay.cfm?deid=188306
12.	 Cutter, S.L., W. Solecki, N. Bragado, J. Carmin, M. Fragkias, 
M. Ruth, and T. Wilbanks, 2014: Ch. 11: Urban systems, 
infrastructure, and vulnerability. Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. 
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. 
Global Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 282-
296.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0F769GR 
13.	 Gargano, J.W., A.L. Freeland, M.A. Morrison, K. Stevens, 
L. Zajac, A. Wolkon, A. Hightower, M.D. Miller, and J.M. 
Brunkard, 2015: Acute gastrointestinal illness following a 
prolonged community-wide water emergency. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 143, 2766-2776.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268814003501 
14.	 Converse, R.R., M.F. Piehler, and R.T. Noble, 2011: Con­
trasts in concentrations and loads of conventional and 
alternative indicators of fecal contamination in coastal 
stormwater. Water Research, 45, 5229-5240.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.07.029 
15.	 Futch, J.C., D.W. Griffin, and E.K. Lipp, 2010: Human 
enteric viruses in groundwater indicate offshore transport 
of human sewage to coral reefs of the Upper Florida Keys. 
Environmental Microbiology, 12, 964-974.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02141.x 
16.	 Futch, J.C., D.W. Griffin, K. Banks, and E.K. Lipp, 2011: 
Evaluation of sewage source and fate on southeast Florida 
coastal reefs. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 2308-2316. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.08.046 
17.	 Levantesi, C., L. Bonadonna, R. Briancesco, E. Grohmann, 
S. Toze, and V. Tandoi, 2012: Salmonella in surface and 
drinking water: Occurrence and water-mediated transmis­
sion. Food Research International, 45, 587-602.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2011.06.037 
18.	 Molina, M., S. Hunter, M. Cyterski, L.A. Peed, C.A. Kel­
ty, M. Sivaganesan, T. Mooney, L. Prieto, and O.C. Shanks, 
2014: Factors affecting the presence of human-associated and 
fecal indicator real-time quantitative PCR genetic markers 
in urban-impacted recreational beaches. Water Research, 64, 
196-208.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.06.036 
References

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
177
19.	 Sauer, E.P., J.L. VandeWalle, M.J. Bootsma, and S.L. McLel­
lan, 2011: Detection of the human specific Bacteroides 
genetic marker provides evidence of widespread sewage con­
tamination of stormwater in the urban environment. Water 
Research, 45, 4081-4091.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2011.04.049 
20.	 Sercu, B., L.C. Van De Werfhorst, J.L.S. Murray, and P.A. 
Holden, 2011: Sewage exfiltration as a source of storm drain 
contamination during dry weather in urban watersheds. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 45, 7151-7157.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200981k 
21.	 Uejio, C.K., S.H. Yale, K. Malecki, M.A. Borchardt, H.A. 
Anderson, and J.A. Patz, 2014: Drinking water systems, 
hydrology, and childhood gastrointestinal illness in cen­
tral and northern Wisconsin. American Journal of Pub­
lic Health, 104, 639-646.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
ajph.2013.301659 
22.	 Walthall, C., P. Backlund, J. Hatfield, L. Lengnick, E. Mar­
shall, M. Walsh, S. Adkins, M. Aillery, E.A. Ainsworth, C. 
Amman, C.J. Anderson, I. Bartomeus, L.H. Baumgard, F. 
Booker, B. Bradley, D.M. Blumenthal, J. Bunce, K. Burkey, 
S.M. Dabney, J.A. Delgado, J. Dukes, A. Funk, K. Garrett, 
M. Glenn, D.A. Grantz, D. Goodrich, S. Hu, R.C. Izaurral­
de, R.A.C. Jones, S.-H. Kim, A.D.B. Leaky, K. Lewers, T.L. 
Mader, A. McClung, J. Morgan, D.J. Muth, M. Nearing, 
D.M. Oosterhuis, D. Ort, C. Parmesan, W.T. Pettigrew, W. 
Polley, R. Rader, C. Rice, M. Rivington, E. Rosskopf, W.A. 
Salas, L.E. Sollenberger, R. Srygley, C. Stöckle, E.S. Takle, 
D. Timlin, J.W. White, R. Winfree, L. Wright-Morton, and 
L.H. Ziska, 2012: Climate Change and Agriculture in the 
United States: Effects and Adaptation. USDA Technical Bul­
letin 1935, 186 pp. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Wash­
ington, 
D.C. 
http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/
effects_2012/CC and Agriculture Report (02-04-2013)b.pdf
23.	 GAO, 2008: Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations: 
EPA Needs More Information and a Clearly Defined Strate­
gy to Protect Air and Water Quality from Pollutants of Con­
cern. GAO-08-944, 79 pp. U.S. Government Accountabili­
ty Office. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08944.pdf
24.	 Hribar, C., 2010: Understanding Concentrated Animal 
Feeding Operations and Their Impact on Communities. 
Schultz, M. (Ed.), 22 pp. National Association of Local 
Boards of Health, Bowling Green, OH. http://www.cdc.gov/
nceh/ehs/docs/understanding_cafos_nalboh.pdf
25.	 NRC, 2010: Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 
21st Century. National Research Council. The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 598 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.17226/12832 
26.	 Sun, L., K.E. Kunkel, L.E. Stevens, A. Buddenberg, J.G. 
Dobson, and D.R. Easterling, 2015: Regional Surface Cli­
mate Conditions in CMIP3 and CMIP5 for the United 
States: Differences, Similarities, and Implications for the 
U.S. National Climate Assessment. NOAA Technical Report 
NESDIS 144, 111 pp. National Oceanic and Atmospher­
ic Administration, National Environmental Satellite, Data, 
and Information Service. http://www.nesdis.noaa.gov/tech­
nical_reports/NOAA_NESDIS_Technical_Report_144.pdf
27.	 USDA, 2014: 2012 Census of Agriculture. 695 pp. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics 
Service, Washington, D.C. http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/
Publications/2012/
28.	 Miller, W.A., D.J. Lewis, M. Lennox, M.G.C. Pereira, K.W. 
Tate, P.A. Conrad, and E.R. Atwill, 2007: Climate and 
on-farm risk factors associated with Giardia duodenalis cysts 
in storm runoff from California coastal dairies. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 73, 6972-6979.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/aem.00100-07 
29.	 Wilkes, G., J. Brassard, T.A. Edge, V. Gannon, C.C. Jok­
inen, T.H. Jones, R. Marti, N.F. Neumann, N.J. Ruecker, 
M. Sunohara, E. Topp, and D.R. Lapen, 2013: Coherence 
among different microbial source tracking markers in a small 
agricultural stream with or without livestock exclusion prac­
tices. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 79, 6207-
6219.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.01626-13 
30.	 Kilonzo, C., X. Li, E.J. Vivas, M.T. Jay-Russell, K.L. Fer­
nandez, and E.R. Atwill, 2013: Fecal shedding of zoonot­
ic food-borne pathogens by wild rodents in a major agri­
cultural region of the central California coast. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 79, 6337-6344.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/aem.01503-13 
31.	 Fremaux, B., T. Boa, and C.K. Yost, 2010: Quantitative 
real-time PCR assays for sensitive detection of Canada 
goose-specific fecal pollution in water sources. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 76, 4886-4889.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/aem.00110-10 
32.	 Parmesan, C. and G. Yohe, 2003: A globally coherent 
fingerprint of climate change impacts across natural sys­
tems. Nature, 421, 37-42.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature01286 
33.	 Craun, G.F., J.M. Brunkard, J.S. Yoder, V.A. Roberts, J. Car­
penter, T. Wade, R.L. Calderon, J.M. Roberts, M.J. Beach, 
and S.L. Roy, 2010: Causes of outbreaks associated with 
drinking water in the United States from 1971 to 2006. 
Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 23, 507-528.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/cmr.00077-09 
34.	 EPA, 2015: Public Drinking Water Systems Programs: Over­
view. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, 
D.C. 
http://water.epa.gov/infrastructure/drinkingwater/
pws/index.cfm

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
178
35.	 EPA, 2012: Private Drinking Water Wells. U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency. http://water.epa.gov/drink/info/
well/index.cfm
36.	 42 USC. Sec 300f et seq., 1974: The Safe Drinking Water 
Act. 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-ti­
tle42/pdf/USCODE-2011-title42-chap6A-subchapXII-par­
tA-sec300f.pdf
37.	 Hilborn, E.D., T.J. Wade, L. Hicks, L. Garrison, J. Carpen­
ter, E. Adam, B. Mull, J.S. Yoder, V. Roberts, and J.W. Gar­
gano, 2013: Surveillance for waterborne disease outbreaks 
associated with drinking water and other nonrecreational 
water — United States, 2009–2010. MMWR. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 62, 714-720.  http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6235a3.htm
38.	 Curriero, F.C., J.A. Patz, J.B. Rose, and S. Lele, 2001: The 
association between extreme precipitation and waterborne 
disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. Ameri­
can Journal of Public Health, 91, 1194-1199.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.91.8.1194 
39.	 Brunkard, J.M., E. Ailes, V.A. Roberts, V. Hill, E.D. Hil­
born, G.F. Craun, A. Rajasingham, A. Kahler, L. Garisson, 
L. Hicks, J. Carpenter, T.J. Wade, M.J. Beach, and J.S. Yod­
er, 2011: Surveillance for waterborne disease outbreaks asso­
ciated with drinking water — United States, 2007–2008. 
MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 60(SS12), 38-68.  http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6012a4.htm
40.	 Bradbury, K.R., M.A. Borchardt, M. Gotkowitz, S.K. Spen­
cer, J. Zhu, and R.J. Hunt, 2013: Source and transport of 
human enteric viruses in deep municipal water supply wells. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 47, 4096-4103.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/es400509b 
41.	 Drayna, P., S.L. McLellan, P. Simpson, S.-H. Li, and M.H. 
Gorelick, 2010: Association between rainfall and pediatric 
emergency department visits for acute gastrointestinal ill­
ness. Environmental Health Perspectives, 118, 1439-1443. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901671 
42.	 Jofre, J., A.R. Blanch, and F. Lucena, 2010: Water-borne 
infectious disease outbreaks associated with water scar­
city and rainfall events. Water Scarcity in the Mediterra­
nean: Perspectives under Global Change. Sabater, S. and D. 
Barcelo, Eds. Springer, Berlin, 147-159.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/698_2009_22 
43.	 Auld, H., D. Maclver, and J. Klaassen, 2004: Heavy rainfall and 
waterborne disease outbreaks: The Walkerton example. Jour­
nal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A, 67, 1879-
1887.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15287390490493475 
44.	 Salvadori, M.I., J.M. Sontrop, A.X. Garg, L.M. Moist, R.S. 
Suri, and W.F. Clark, 2009: Factors that led to the Walkerton 
tragedy. Kidney International, 75, S33-S34.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/ki.2008.616 
45.	 Fong, T.-T., L.S. Mansfield, D.L. Wilson, D.J. Schwab, 
S.L. Molloy, and J.B. Rose, 2007: Massive microbiological 
groundwater contamination associated with a waterborne 
outbreak in Lake Erie, South Bass Island, Ohio. Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 115, 856-864.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.9430 
46.	 Hoxie, N.J., J.P. Davis, J.M. Vergeront, R.D. Nashold, and 
K.A. Blair, 1997: Cryptosporidiosis-associated mortality fol­
lowing a massive waterborne outbreak in Milwaukee, Wis­
consin. American Journal of Public Health, 87, 2032-2035. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/ajph.87.12.2032 
47.	 Mac Kenzie, W.R., N.J. Hoxie, M.E. Proctor, M.S. Gradus, 
K.A. Blair, D.E. Peterson, J.J. Kazmierczak, D.G. Addiss, 
K.R. Fox, J.B. Rose, and J.P. Davis, 1994: A massive out­
break in Milwaukee of Cryptosporidium infection transmit­
ted through the public water supply. The New England Jour­
nal of Medicine, 331, 161-167.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
nejm199407213310304 
48.	 Nichols, G., C. Lane, N. Asgari, N.Q. Verlander, and A. 
Charlett, 2009: Rainfall and outbreaks of drinking water 
related disease and in England and Wales. Journal of Water 
Health, 7, 1-8.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wh.2009.143 
49.	 Kozlica, J., A.L. Claudet, D. Solomon, J.R. Dunn, and 
L.R. Carpenter, 2010: Waterborne outbreak of Salmonella I 
4,[5],12:i:-. Foodborne Pathogens and Disease, 7, 1431-1433. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/fpd.2010.0556 
50.	 Clark, C.G., L. Price, R. Ahmed, D.L. Woodward, P.L. Meli­
to, F.G. Rodgers, F. Jamieson, B. Ciebin, A. Li, and A. Ellis, 
2003: Characterization of waterborne outbreak–associated 
Campylobacter jejuni, Walkerton, Ontario. Emerging Infec­
tious Diseases, 9, 1232-1241.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid0910.020584 
51.	 Walkerton Commission of Inquiry, 2002: Part One Report 
of the Walkerton Commission of Inquiry: The Events of 
May 2000 and Related Issues. 504 pp. Ontario Ministry of 
the Attorney General, Toronto, ONT. http://www.attorney­
general.jus.gov.on.ca/english/about/pubs/walkerton/part1/
52.	 Delpla, I., A.-V. Jung, E. Baures, M. Clement, and O. Thom­
as, 2009: Impacts of climate change on surface water qual­
ity in relation to drinking water production. Environment 
International, 35, 1225-1233.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2009.07.001 
53.	 EPA, 2015: 2015 Drinking Water Health Advisories for Two 
Cyanobacterial Toxins. EPA 820F15003. U.S. Environmen­
tal Protection Agency, Office of Water. http://www2.epa.
gov/sites/production/files/2015-06/documents/cyanotox­
ins-fact_sheet-2015.pdf
54.	 EPA, 2015: Recommendations for Public Water Systems to 
Manage Cyanotoxins in Drinking Water. EPA 815-R-15-
010. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. 
http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-06/docu­
ments/cyanotoxin-management-drinking-water.pdf

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
179
55.	 Zamyadi, A., S.L. MacLeod, Y. Fan, N. McQuaid, S. Dorner, 
S. Sauvé, and M. Prévost, 2012: Toxic cyanobacterial break­
through and accumulation in a drinking water plant: A mon­
itoring and treatment challenge. Water Research, 46, 1511-
1523.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.11.012 
56.	 Zamyadi, A., S. Dorner, S. Sauve, D. Ellis, A. Bolduc, C. 
Bastien, and M. Prevost, 2013: Species-dependence of cya­
nobacteria removal efficiency by different drinking water 
treatment processes. Water Research, 47, 2689-2700.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.02.040 
57.	 City of Toledo, 2014: Microcystin Event Preliminary Sum­
mary. 73 pp. City of Toledo Department of Public Utilities. 
http://toledo.oh.gov/media/132055/Microcystin-Test-Re­
sults.pdf
58.	 Georgakakos, A., P. Fleming, M. Dettinger, C. Peters-Lidard, 
T.C. Richmond, K. Reckhow, K. White, and D. Yates, 2014: 
Ch. 3: Water resources. Climate Change Impacts in the United 
States: The Third National Climate Assessment. Melillo, J.M., 
T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds. U.S. Global Change 
Research Program, Washington, D.C., 69-112.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.7930/J0G44N6T 
59.	 Cann, K.F., D.R. Thomas, R.L. Salmon, A.P. Wyn-Jones, 
and D. Kay, 2013: Extreme water-related weather events and 
waterborne disease. Epidemiology and Infection, 141, 671-86. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0950268812001653 
60.	 Angelakis, A.N. and P. Gikas, 2014: Water reuse: Overview 
of current practices and trends in the world with emphasis 
on EU states. Water Utility Journal, 8, 67-78.  http://www.
ewra.net/wuj/pdf/WUJ_2014_08_07.pdf
61.	 Jimenez, B. and T. Asano, 2008: Water reclamation and 
reuse around the world. Water Reuse: An International Survey 
of Current Practice, Issues and Needs. IWA Publishing, Lon­
don, UK.  
62.	 Wintgens, T., F. Salehi, R. Hochstrat, and T. Melin, 2008: 
Emerging contaminants and treatment options in water 
recycling for indirect potable use. Water Science & Technology, 
57, 99-107.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wst.2008.799 
63.	 MacDonald, G.M., 2010: Water, climate change, and 
sustainability in the southwest. Proceedings of the Nation­
al Academy of Sciences, 107, 21256-21262.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0909651107 
64.	 NRC, 2012: Water Reuse: Potential for Expanding the Nation’s 
Water Supply through Reuse of Municipal Wastewater. Nation­
al Academies Press, Washington, D.C.  
65.	 Vo, P.T., H.H. Ngo, W. Guo, J.L. Zhou, P.D. Nguyen, A. 
Listowski, and X.C. Wang, 2014: A mini-review on the 
impacts of climate change on wastewater reclamation and 
reuse. Science of the Total Environment, 494-495, 9-17. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.06.090 
66.	 Bastian, R. and D. Murray, 2012: 2012 Guidelines for Water 
Reuse. EPA/600/R-12/618, 643 pp. U.S. EPA Office of 
Research and Development, Washington, D.C. http://nepis.
epa.gov/Adobe/PDF/P100FS7K.pdf
67.	 Shuster, W.D., D. Lye, A. De La Cruz, L.K. Rhea, K. O’Con­
nell, and A. Kelty, 2013: Assessment of residential rain bar­
rel water quality and use in Cincinnati, Ohio. Journal of the 
American Water Resources Association, 49, 753-765.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/jawr.12036 
68.	 Ahmed, W., A. Vieritz, A. Goonetilleke, and T. Gardner, 
2010: Health risk from the use of roof-harvested rainwater 
in southeast Queensland, Australia, as potable or nonpotable 
water, determined using quantitative microbial risk assess­
ment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76, 7382-
7391.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00944-10 
69.	 Lye, D.J., 2002: Health risks associated with consumption 
of untreated water from household roof catchment systems. 
Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 38, 1301-
1306.  
70.	 Whitehead, P.G., R.L. Wilby, R.W. Battarbee, M. Kernan, 
and A.J. Wade, 2009: A review of the potential impacts of 
climate change on surface water quality. Hydrological Sci­
ences Journal, 54, 101-123.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1623/
hysj.54.1.101 
71.	 Sterk, A., J. Schijven, T. de Nijs, and A.M. de Roda Hus­
man, 2013: Direct and indirect effects of climate change on 
the risk of infection by water-transmitted pathogens. Envi­
ronmental Science & Technology, 47, 12648-12660.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/es403549s 
72.	 Schijven, J., M. Bouwknegt, A.M. de Roda Husman, S. 
Rutjes, B. Sudre, J.E. Suk, and J.C. Semenza, 2013: A deci­
sion support tool to compare waterborne and foodborne 
infection and/or illness risks associated with climate change. 
Risk Analysis, 33, 2154-2167.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
risa.12077 
73.	 Smith, B.A., T. Ruthman, E. Sparling, H. Auld, N. Comer, I. 
Young, A.M. Lammerding, and A. Fazil, 2015: A risk mod­
eling framework to evaluate the impacts of climate change 
and adaptation on food and water safety. Food Research 
International, 68, 78-85.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2014.07.006 
74.	 Levin, R.B., P.R. Epstein, T.E. Ford, W. Harrington, E. 
Olson, and E.G. Reichard, 2002: U.S. drinking water chal­
lenges in the twenty-first century. Environmental Health Per­
spectives, 110, 43-52. PMC1241146 
75.	 Rose, J.B., P.R. Epstein, E.K. Lipp, B.H. Sherman, S.M. 
Bernard, and J.A. Patz, 2001: Climate variability and change 
in the United States: Potential impacts on water- and food­
borne diseases caused by microbiologic agents. Environmen­
tal Health Perspectives, 109 Suppl 2, 211-221. PMC1240668 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
180
76.	 Perry, D., D. Bennett, U. Boudjou, M. Hahn, S. McLellan, 
and S. Elizabeth, 2012: Effect of climate change on sewer 
overflows in Milwaukee. Proceedings of the Water Environ­
ment Federation, WEFTEC 2012: Session 30, pp. 1857-1866. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2175/193864712811725546
77.	 Hlavsa, M.C., V.A. Roberts, A. Kahler, E.D. Hilborn, T.J. 
Wade, L.C. Backer, and J.S. Yoder, 2014: Recreational 
water–associated disease outbreaks — United States, 2009–
2010. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 
6-10. 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6301a2.htm
78.	 Stumpf, R.P., V. Fleming-Lehtinen, and E. Granéli, 2010: 
Integration of data for nowcasting of harmful algal blooms. 
Proceedings of OceanObs’09: Sustained Ocean Observations and 
Information for Society (Volume 1), 21-25 September, Venice, 
Italy. Hall, J., D.E. Harrison, and D. Stammer, Eds. http://
www.oceanobs09.net/proceedings/pp/pp36/index.php
79.	 Colford, J.M., Jr., K.C. Schiff, J.F. Griffith, V. Yau, B.F. 
Arnold, C.C. Wright, J.S. Gruber, T.J. Wade, S. Burns, J. 
Hayes, C. McGee, M. Gold, Y. Cao, R.T. Noble, R. Haug­
land, and S.B. Weisberg, 2012: Using rapid indicators for 
Enterococcus to assess the risk of illness after exposure to urban 
runoff contaminated marine water. Water Research, 46, 2176-
2186.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.01.033 
80.	 Colford, J.M., Jr., T.J. Wade, K.C. Schiff, C.C. Wright, 
J.F. Griffith, S.K. Sandhu, S. Burns, M. Sobsey, G. Love­
lace, and S.B. Weisberg, 2007: Water quality indicators and 
the risk of illness at beaches with nonpoint sources of fecal 
contamination. Epidemiology, 18, 27-35.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.ede.0000249425.32990.b9 
81.	 Wade, T.J., E. Sams, K.P. Brenner, R. Haugland, E. Chern, 
M. Beach, L. Wymer, C.C. Rankin, D. Love, Q. Li, R. 
Noble, and A.P. Dufour, 2010: Rapidly measured indicators 
of recreational water quality and swimming-associated illness 
at marine beaches: A prospective cohort study. Environmen­
tal Health, Article 66.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069X-9-66 
82.	 Haley, B.J., D.J. Cole, and E.K. Lipp, 2009: Distribution, 
diversity, and seasonality of waterborne salmonellae in a 
rural watershed. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
75, 1248-1255.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.01648-08 
83.	 Vereen, E., Jr., R.R. Lowrance, D.J. Cole, and E.K. Lipp, 
2007: Distribution and ecology of campylobacters in coastal 
plain streams (Georgia, United States of America). Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 73, 1395-1403.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1128/aem.01621-06 
84.	 Vereen, E., Jr., R.R. Lowrance, M.B. Jenkins, P. Adams, S. 
Rajeev, and E.K. Lipp, 2013: Landscape and seasonal fac­
tors influence Salmonella and Campylobacter prevalence in a 
rural mixed use watershed. Water Research, 47, 6075-6085. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.07.028 
85.	 Bharti, A.R., J.E. Nally, J.N. Ricaldi, M.A. Matthias, M.M. 
Diaz, M.A. Lovett, P.N. Levett, R.H. Gilman, M.R. Wil­
lig, E. Gotuzzo, and J.M. Vinetz, 2003: Leptospirosis: A 
zoonotic disease of global importance. The Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, 3, 757-771.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-
3099(03)00830-2 
86.	 Howell, D. and D. Cole, 2006: Leptospirosis: A waterborne 
zoonotic disease of global importance. Georgia Epidemiology 
Report, 22, 1-2.  http://dph.georgia.gov/sites/dph.georgia.
gov/files/related_files/site_page/ADES_Aug06GER.pdf
87.	 Lau, C.L., L.D. Smythe, S.B. Craig, and P. Weinstein, 2010: 
Climate change, flooding, urbanisation and leptospirosis: 
Fuelling the fire? Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropi­
cal Medicine and Hygiene, 104, 631-638.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.trstmh.2010.07.002 
88.	 Lau, C.L., A.J. Dobson, L.D. Smythe, E.J. Fearnley, C. 
Skelly, A.C.A. Clements, S.B. Craig, S.D. Fuimaono, and 
P. Weinstein, 2012: Leptospirosis in American Samoa 2010: 
Epidemiology, environmental drivers, and the management 
of emergence. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine 
and Hygiene, 86, 309-319.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajt­
mh.2012.11-0398 
89.	 Katz, A.R., A.E. Buchholz, K. Hinson, S.Y. Park, and P.V. 
Effler, 2011: Leptospirosis in Hawaii, USA, 1999–2008. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17, 221-226.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid1702.101109 
90.	 Hartskeerl, R.A., M. Collares-Pereira, and W.A. Ellis, 2011: 
Emergence, control and re-emerging leptospirosis: Dynamics 
of infection in the changing world. Clinical Microbiology and 
Infection, 17, 494-501.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
0691.2011.03474.x 
91.	 Desvars, A., S. Jégo, F. Chiroleu, P. Bourhy, E. Cardinale, 
and A. Michault, 2011: Seasonality of human leptospirosis 
in Reunion Island (Indian Ocean) and its association with 
meteorological data. PLoS ONE, 6, e20377.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020377 
92.	 Newton, A., M. Kendall, D.J. Vugia, O.L. Henao, and B.E. 
Mahon, 2012: Increasing rates of vibriosis in the United 
States, 1996–2010: Review of surveillance data from 2 sys­
tems. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 54, S391-S395.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis243 
93.	 Dechet, A.M., P.A. Yu, N. Koram, and J. Painter, 2008: 
Nonfoodborne Vibrio infections: An important cause of 
morbidity and mortality in the United States, 1997–2006. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 46, 970-976.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/529148 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
181
94.	 Yoder, J.S., M.C. Hlavsa, G.F. Craun, V. Hill, V. Roberts, 
P.A. Yu, L.A. Hicks, N.T. Alexander, R.L. Calderon, S.L. 
Roy, and M.J. Beach, 2008: Surveillance for waterborne dis­
ease and outbreaks associated with recreational water use and 
other aquatic facility-associated health events--United States, 
2005-2006. MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 57(SS09), 
1-29.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmWR/preview/mmwrhtml/
ss5709a1.htm
95.	 Froelich, B., J. Bowen, R. Gonzalez, A. Snedeker, and 
R. Noble, 2013: Mechanistic and statistical models of 
total Vibrio abundance in the Neuse River Estuary. Water 
Research, 47, 5783-5793.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2013.06.050 
96.	 Vezzulli, L., I. Brettar, E. Pezzati, P.C. Reid, R.R. Colwell, 
M.G. Höfle, and C. Pruzzo, 2012: Long-term effects of 
ocean warming on the prokaryotic community: Evidence 
from the vibrios. The ISME Journal, 6, 21-30.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/ismej.2011.89 
97.	 Lipp, E.K., C. Rodriguez-Palacios, and J.B. Rose, 2001: 
Occurrence and distribution of the human pathogen Vib­
rio vulnificus in a subtropical Gulf of Mexico estuary. The 
Ecology and Etiology of Newly Emerging Marine Diseases. Por­
ter, J.W., Ed. Springer, Dordrecht, 165-173.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-017-3284-0_15 
98.	 Louis, V.R., E. Russek-Cohen, N. Choopun, I.N.G. Rive­
ra, B. Gangle, S.C. Jiang, A. Rubin, J.A. Patz, A. Huq, and 
R.R. Colwell, 2003: Predictability of Vibrio cholerae in 
Chesapeake Bay. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
69, 2773-2785.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.69.5.2773-
2785.2003 
99.	 Griffitt, K.J. and D.J. Grimes, 2013: Abundance and distri­
bution of Vibrio cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, and V. vulnifi­
cus following a major freshwater intrusion into the Missis­
sippi Sound. Microbial Ecology, 65, 578-583.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s00248-013-0203-6 
100.	 Constantin de Magny, G., W. Long, C.W. Brown, R.R. 
Hood, A. Huq, R. Murtugudde, and R.R. Colwell, 2009: 
Predicting the distribution of Vibrio spp. in the Chesapeake 
Bay: A Vibrio cholerae case study. EcoHealth, 6, 378-389. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-009-0273-6 
101.	 Hilborn, E.D., V.A. Roberts, L. Backer, E. DeConno, J.S. 
Egan, J.B. Hyde, D.C. Nicholas, E.J. Wiegert, L.M. Bill­
ing, M. DiOrio, M.C. Mohr, F.J. Hardy, T.J. Wade, J.S. 
Yoder, and M.C. Hlavsa, 2014: Algal bloom–associated dis­
ease outbreaks among users of freshwater lakes — United 
States, 2009–2010. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Week­
ly Report, 63, 11-15.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm6301a3.htm
102.	 Paerl, H.W. and J. Huisman, 2008: Blooms like it hot. Science, 
320, 57-58.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/Science.1155398 
103.	 Paerl, H.W., N.S. Hall, and E.S. Calandrino, 2011: Con­
trolling harmful cyanobacterial blooms in a world experi­
encing anthropogenic and climatic-induced change. Science 
of The Total Environment, 409, 1739-1745.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.02.001 
104.	 Paerl, H.W. and V.J. Paul, 2012: Climate change: Links 
to global expansion of harmful cyanobacteria. Water 
Research, 46, 1349-1363.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2011.08.002 
105.	 Paerl, H.W. and T.G. Otten, 2013: Blooms bite the hand 
that feeds them. Science, 342, 433-434.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1245276 
106.	 Carey, C.C., B.W. Ibelings, E.P. Hoffmann, D.P. Hamilton, 
and J.D. Brookes, 2012: Eco-physiological adaptations that 
favour freshwater cyanobacteria in a changing climate. Water 
Research, 46, 1394-1407.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2011.12.016 
107.	 Kosten, S., V.L.M. Huszar, E. Bécares, L.S. Costa, E. van 
Donk, L.-A. Hansson, E. Jeppesen, C. Kruk, G. Lacerot, 
N. Mazzeo, L. De Meester, B. Moss, M. Lürling, T. Nõg­
es, S. Romo, and M. Scheffer, 2012: Warmer climates boost 
cyanobacterial dominance in shallow lakes. Global Change 
Biology, 18, 118-126.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2486.2011.02488.x 
108.	 O’Neil, J.M., T.W. Davis, M.A. Burford, and C.J. Gob­
ler, 2012: The rise of harmful cyanobacteria blooms: The 
potential roles of eutrophication and climate change. 
Harmful Algae, 14, 313-334.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
hal.2011.10.027 
109.	 Elliott, J.A., 2010: The seasonal sensitivity of Cyanobac­
teria and other phytoplankton to changes in flushing rate 
and water temperature. Global Change Biology, 16, 864-876. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01998.x 
110.	 Kirkpatrick, B., L.E. Fleming, L.C. Backer, J.A. Bean, R. 
Tamer, G. Kirkpatrick, T. Kane, A. Wanner, D. Dalpra, A. 
Reich, and D.G. Baden, 2006: Environmental exposures 
to Florida red tides: Effects on emergency room respiratory 
diagnoses admissions. Harmful Algae, 5, 526-533.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2005.09.004 
111.	 Fleming, L.E., B. Kirkpatrick, L.C. Backer, C.J. Walsh, K. 
Nierenberg, J. Clark, A. Reich, J. Hollenbeck, J. Benson, Y.S. 
Cheng, J. Naar, R. Pierce, A.J. Bourdelais, W.M. Abraham, 
G. Kirkpatrick, J. Zaias, A. Wanner, E. Mendes, S. Shalat, 
P. Hoagland, W. Stephan, J. Bean, S. Watkins, T. Clarke, 
M. Byrne, and D.G. Baden, 2011: Review of Florida red 
tide and human health effects. Harmful Algae, 10, 224-233. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2010.08.006 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
182
112.	 Fleming, L.E., B. Kirkpatrick, L.C. Backer, J.A. Bean, A. 
Wanner, D. Dalpra, R. Tamer, J. Zaias, Y.-S. Cheng, R. 
Pierce, J. Naar, W. Abraham, R. Clark, Y. Zhou, M.S. Hen­
ry, D. Johnson, G. Van de Bogart, G.D. Bossart, M. Har­
rington, and D.G. Baden, 2005: Initial evaluation of the 
effects of aerosolized Florida red tide toxins (Brevetoxins) in 
persons with asthma. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113, 
650–657.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7500 
113.	 Fleming, L.E., B. Kirkpatrick, L.C. Backer, J.A. Bean, A. 
Wanner, A. Reich, J. Zaias, Y.-S. Cheng, R. Pierce, J. Naar, 
W.M. Abraham, and D.G. Baden, 2007: Aerosolized red­
tide toxins (Brevetoxins) and asthma. Chest, 131, 187-194. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1378/chest.06-1830 
114.	 Thyng, K.M., R.D. Hetland, M.T. Ogle, X. Zhang, F. Chen, 
and L. Campbell, 2013: Origins of Karenia brevis harmful 
algal blooms along the Texas coast. Limnology and Oceanog­
raphy: Fluids and Environments, 3, 269-278.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1215/21573689-2417719 
115.	 Maier Brown, A.F., Q. Dortch, F.M. Van Dolah, T.A. Leigh­
field, W. Morrison, A.E. Thessen, K. Steidinger, B. Richard­
son, C.A. Moncreiff, and J.R. Pennock, 2006: Effect of salin­
ity on the distribution, growth, and toxicity of Karenia spp. 
Harmful Algae, 5, 199-212.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
hal.2005.07.004 
116.	 McLellan, S.L., E.J. Hollis, M.M. Depas, M. Van Dyke, 
J. Harris, and C.O. Scopel, 2007: Distribution and fate of 
Escherichia coli in Lake Michigan following contamination 
with urban stormwater and combined sewer overflows. Jour­
nal of Great Lakes Research, 33, 566-580.  http://dx.doi.org/
10.3394/0380-1330(2007)33%5B566:dafoec%5D2.0.co;2 
117.	 Corsi, S.R., M.A. Borchardt, S.K. Spencer, P.E. Hughes, 
and A.K. Baldwin, 2014: Human and bovine viruses in the 
Milwaukee River watershed: Hydrologically relevant repre­
sentation and relations with environmental variables. Sci­
ence of The Total Environment, 490, 849-860.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.05.072 
118.	 Duris, J.W., A.G. Reif, D.A. Krouse, and N.M. Isaacs, 2013: 
Factors related to occurrence and distribution of selected 
bacterial and protozoan pathogens in Pennsylvania streams. 
Water Research, 47, 300-314.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2012.10.006 
119.	 Staley, C., K.H. Reckhow, J. Lukasik, and V.J. Harwood, 
2012: Assessment of sources of human pathogens and 
fecal contamination in a Florida freshwater lake. Water 
Research, 46, 5799-5812.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2012.08.012 
120.	 McBride, G.B., R. Stott, W. Miller, D. Bambic, and S. 
Wuertz, 2013: Discharge-based QMRA for estimation 
of public health risks from exposure to stormwater-borne 
pathogens in recreational waters in the United States. Water 
Research, 47, 5282-5297.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2013.06.001 
121.	 NOAA, 2014: Sea Level Rise and Nuisance Flood Frequency 
Changes around the United States. NOAA Technical Report 
NOS CO-OPS 073, 58 pp. U.S. Department of Com­
merce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
National Ocean Service, Silver Spring, MD. http://tidesand­
currents.noaa.gov/publications/NOAA_Technical_Report_
NOS_COOPS_073.pdf
122.	 Casman, E., B. Fischhoff, M. Small, H. Dowlatabadi, J. 
Rose, and M.G. Morgan, 2001: Climate change and crypto­
sporidiosis: A qualitative analysis. Climatic Change, 50, 219-
249.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/a:1010623831501 
123.	 Naumova, E.N., J.S. Jagai, B. Matyas, A. DeMaria, I.B. Mac­
Neill, and J.K. Griffiths, 2007: Seasonality in six enterically 
transmitted diseases and ambient temperature. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 135, 281-292.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268806006698 
124.	 Peeters, F., D. Straile, A. Lorke, and D.M. Livingstone, 2007: 
Earlier onset of the spring phytoplankton bloom in lakes 
of the temperate zone in a warmer climate. Global Change 
Biology, 13, 1898-1909.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2486.2007.01412.x 
125.	 Suikkanen, S., M. Laamanen, and M. Huttunen, 2007: 
Long-term changes in summer phytoplankton communi­
ties of the open northern Baltic Sea. Estuarine, Coastal and 
Shelf Science, 71, 580-592.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecss.2006.09.004 
126.	 Wiedner, C., J. Rücker, R. Brüggemann, and B. Nixdorf, 
2007: Climate change affects timing and size of populations 
of an invasive cyanobacterium in temperate regions. Oecolo­
gia, 152, 473-484.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00442-007-
0683-5 
127.	 Wagner, C. and R. Adrian, 2009: Cyanobacteria dominance: 
Quantifying the effects of climate change. Limnology and 
Oceanography, 54, 2460-2468.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4319/
lo.2009.54.6_part_2.2460 
128.	 Vincent, W.F. and A. Quesada, 2012: Cyanobacteria in high 
latitude lakes, rivers and seas. Ecology of Cyanobacteria II: 
Their Diversity in Space and Time. Whitton, B.A., Ed. Spring­
er, New York, 371-385.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-94-
007-3855-3 
129.	 Padisak, J., 1997: Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Wolo­
szynska) Seenayya et Subba Raju, an expanding, highly adap­
tive cyanobacterium: Worldwide distribution and review 
of its ecology. Archiv Für Hydrobiologie Supplementband 
Monographische Beitrage 107, 563-593.  http://real.mtak.
hu/3229/1/1014071.pdf
130.	 Stüken, A., J. Rücker, T. Endrulat, K. Preussel, M. Hemm, 
B. Nixdorf, U. Karsten, and C. Wiedner, 2006: Distribu­
tion of three alien cyanobacterial species (Nostocales) in 
northeast Germany: Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, Anabaena 
bergii and Aphanizomenon aphanizomenoides. Phycologia, 45, 
696-703.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2216/05-58.1 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
183
131.	 Elliott, J.A., 2012: Is the future blue-green? A review of the 
current model predictions of how climate change could affect 
pelagic freshwater cyanobacteria. Water Research, 46, 1364-
1371.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.12.018 
132.	 Jacobs, J., S.K. Moore, K.E. Kunkel, and L. Sun, 2015: A 
framework for examining climate-driven changes to the sea­
sonality and geographical range of coastal pathogens and 
harmful algae. Climate Risk Management, 8, 16-27.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2015.03.002 
133.	 Urquhart, E.A., B.F. Zaitchik, D.W. Waugh, S.D. Guike­
ma, and C.E. Del Castillo, 2014: Uncertainty in model pre­
dictions of Vibrio vulnificus response to climate variability 
and change: A Chesapeake Bay case study. PLoS ONE, 9, 
e98256.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0098256 
134.	 Froelich, B.A., T.C. Williams, R.T. Noble, and J.D. Oliver, 
2012: Apparent loss of Vibrio vulnificus from North Carolina 
oysters coincides with a drought-induced increase in salini­
ty. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 78, 3885-3889. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.07855-11 
135.	 Copat, C., G. Arena, M. Fiore, C. Ledda, R. Fallico, S. 
Sciacca, and M. Ferrante, 2013: Heavy metals concentra­
tions in fish and shellfish from eastern Mediterranean Sea: 
Consumption advisories. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 53, 
33-37.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2012.11.038 
136.	 Ho, K.K.Y. and K.M.Y. Leung, 2014: Organotin contam­
ination in seafood and its implication for human health 
risk in Hong Kong. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 85, 634-640. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013.12.039 
137.	 Shapiro, K., M. Silver, J. Largier, J. Mazet, W. Miller, M. 
Odagiri, and A. Schriewer, 2012: Pathogen aggregation: 
Understanding when, where, and why seafood contamina­
tion occurs. Journal of Shellfish Research, 31, 345.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.2983/035.031.0124 
138.	 FDA, 2005: Quantitative Risk Assessment on the Public 
Health Impact of Pathogenic Vibrio parahaemolyticus in Raw 
Oysters. 309 pp. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food 
Safety and Applied Nutrition. http://www.fda.gov/Food/
FoodScienceResearch/RiskSafetyAssessment/ucm050421.
htm
139.	 Bellou, M., P. Kokkinos, and A. Vantarakis, 2013: Shell­
fish-borne viral outbreaks: A systematic review. Food 
and Environmental Virology, 5, 13-23.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s12560-012-9097-6 
140.	 Iwamoto, M., T. Ayers, B.E. Mahon, and D.L. Swerdlow, 
2010: Epidemiology of seafood-associated infections in the 
United States. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 23, 399-411. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/Cmr.00059-09 
141.	 Le Saux, J., O. Serais, J. Krol, S. Parnaudeau, P. Salvagnac, 
G. Delmas, V. Cicchelero, J. Claudet, P. Pothier, and K. 
Balay, 2009: Evidence of the presence of viral contamination 
in shellfish after short rainfall events. 6th International Con­
ference on Molluscan Shellfish Safety, Blenheim, New Zealand. 
Busby, P., Ed., pp. 256-252.
142.	 Wang, J. and Z. Deng, 2012: Detection and forecasting of 
oyster norovirus outbreaks: Recent advances and future per­
spectives. Marine Environmental Research, 80, 62-69.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2012.06.011 
143.	 Riou, P., J.C. Le Saux, F. Dumas, M.P. Caprais, S.F. Le 
Guyader, and M. Pommepuy, 2007: Microbial impact of 
small tributaries on water and shellfish quality in shallow 
coastal areas. Water Research, 41, 2774-2786.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.03.003 
144.	 Coulliette, A.D., E.S. Money, M.L. Serre, and R.T. Noble, 
2009: Space/time analysis of fecal pollution and rainfall in 
an eastern North Carolina estuary. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 43, 3728-3735.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
es803183f 
145.	 Lowther, J.A., K. Henshilwood, and D.N. Lees, 2008: 
Determination of norovirus contamination in oysters from 
two commercial harvesting areas over an extended period, 
using semiquantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR. 
Journal of Food Protection, 71, 1427-1433.  
146.	 Maalouf, H., M. Zakhour, J. Le Pendu, J.C. Le Saux, R.L. 
Atmar, and F.S. Le Guyader, 2010: Distribution in tissue and 
seasonal variation of norovirus genogroup I and II ligands in 
oysters. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76, 5621-
5630.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.00148-10 
147.	 Woods, J.W. and W. Burkhardt, 2010: Occurrence of nor­
ovirus and hepatitis A virus in U.S. oysters. Food and Envi­
ronmental Virology, 2, 176-182.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12560-010-9040-7 
148.	 Crim, S.M., M. Iwamoto, J.Y. Huang, P.M. Griffin, D. 
Gilliss, A.B. Cronquist, M. Cartter, M. Tobin-D’Angelo, 
D. Blythe, K. Smith, S. Lathrop, S. Zansky, P.R. Cieslak, 
J. Dunn, K.G. Holt, S. Lance, R. Tauxe, and O.L. Henao, 
2014: Incidence and trends of infections with pathogens 
transmitted commonly through food--Foodborne Diseas­
es Active Surveillance Network, 10 U.S. sites, 2006-2013. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 328-
332. 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6315a3.htm
149.	 Rippey, S.R., 1994: Infectious diseases associated with mol­
luscan shellfish consumption. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 
7, 419-425.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/cmr.7.4.419 
150.	 Lynch, M., J. Painter, R. Woodruff, and C. Braden, 2006: 
Surveillance for foodborne-disease outbreaks – United States, 
1998-2002. MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 55(SS10), 
1-42. 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
ss5510a1.htm?_cid=ss

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
184
151.	 Vugia, D., A. Cronquist, J. Hadler, M. Tobin-D’Angelo, 
D. Blythe, K. Smith, K. Thornton, D. Morse, P. Cieslak, T. 
Jones, K. Holt, J. Guzewich, O. Henao, E. Scallan, F. Angu­
lo, P. Griffin, R. Tauxe, and E. Barzilay, 2006: Preliminary 
FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens 
transmitted commonly through food – 10 states, Unit­
ed States, 2005. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 55, 392-395.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5514a2.htm
152.	 Martinez-Urtaza, J., J.C. Bowers, J. Trinanes, and A. 
DePaola, 2010: Climate anomalies and the increasing risk 
of Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus illnesses. 
Food Research International, 43, 1780-1790.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.04.001 
153.	 Martinez-Urtaza, J., C. Baker-Austin, J.L. Jones, A.E. New­
ton, G.D. Gonzalez-Aviles, and A. DePaola, 2013: Spread 
of Pacific Northwest Vibrio parahaemolyticus strain. The 
New England Journal of Medicine, 369, 1573-1574.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1305535 
154.	 McLaughlin, J.B., A. DePaola, C.A. Bopp, K.A. Martinek, 
N.P. Napolilli, C.G. Allison, S.L. Murray, E.C. Thompson, 
M.M. Bird, and J.P. Middaugh, 2005: Outbreak of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus gastroenteritis associated with Alaskan oys­
ters. The New England Journal of Medicine, 353, 1463-1470. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa051594 
155.	 Newton, A.E., N. Garrett, S.G. Stroika, J.L. Halpin, M. 
Turnsek, and R.K. Mody, 2014: Notes from the field: 
Increase in Vibrio parahaemolyticus infections associat­
ed with consumption of Atlantic Coast shellfish — 2013. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 335-
336.  http://origin.glb.cdc.gov/MMWR/preview/mmwrht­
ml/mm6315a6.htm?s_cid=mm6315a6_w
156.	 NSSP, 2011: National Shellfish Sanitation Program (NSSP) 
Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish, 2011 Revi­
sion. 478 pp. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser­
vices, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration. 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/GuidanceRegulation/
FederalStateFoodPrograms/UCM350344.pdf
157.	 Baker-Austin, C., J.A. Trinanes, N.G.H. Taylor, R. Hartnell, 
A. Siitonen, and J. Martinez-Urtaza, 2013: Emerging Vibrio 
risk at high latitudes in response to ocean warming. Nature 
Climate Change, 3, 73-77.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncli­
mate1628 
158.	 Ralston, E.P., H. Kite-Powell, and A. Beet, 2011: An esti­
mate of the cost of acute health effects from food- and water-
borne marine pathogens and toxins in the USA. Journal of 
Water and Health, 9, 680-694.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2011.157 
159.	 Takemura, A.F., D.M. Chien, and M.F. Polz, 2014: Asso­
ciations and dynamics of Vibrionaceae in the environment, 
from the genus to the population level. Frontiers in Microbi­
ology, 5.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00038 
160.	 Hashizume, M., A.S.G. Faruque, T. Terao, M. Yunus, K. 
Streatfield, T. Yamamoto, and K. Moji, 2011: The Indi­
an Ocean dipole and cholera incidence in Bangladesh: A 
time-series analysis. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119, 
239-244.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1002302 
161.	 Lara, R.J., S.B. Neogi, M.S. Islam, Z.H. Mahmud, S. Yama­
saki, and G.B. Nair, 2009: Influence of catastrophic climatic 
events and human waste on Vibrio distribution in the Kar­
naphuli Estuary, Bangladesh. EcoHealth, 6, 279-286.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10393-009-0257-6 
162.	 Turner, J.W., B. Good, D. Cole, and E.K. Lipp, 2009: 
Plankton composition and environmental factors contrib­
ute to Vibrio seasonality. The ISME Journal, 3, 1082-1092. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2009.50 
163.	 Turner, J.W., L. Malayil, D. Guadagnoli, D. Cole, and E.K. 
Lipp, 2014: Detection of Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Vibrio 
vulnificus and Vibrio cholerae with respect to seasonal fluc­
tuations in temperature and plankton abundance. Envi­
ronmental Microbiology, 16, 1019-1028.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1462-2920.12246 
164.	 Campbell, L., R.J. Olson, H.M. Sosik, A. Abraham, D.W. 
Henrichs, C.J. Hyatt, and E.J. Buskey, 2010: First harmful 
Dinophysis (Dinophyceae, Dinophysiales) bloom in the U.S. 
is revealed by automated imaging flow cytometry. Journal 
of Phycology, 46, 66-75.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1529-
8817.2009.00791.x 
165.	 Nishimura, T., S. Sato, W. Tawong, H. Sakanari, K. Uehara, 
M.M.R. Shah, S. Suda, T. Yasumoto, Y. Taira, H. Yamagu­
chi, and M. Adachi, 2013: Genetic diversity and distribu­
tion of the ciguatera-causing dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus 
spp. (Dinophyceae) in coastal areas of Japan. PLoS ONE, 8, 
e60882.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060882 
166.	 Tester, P.A., R.P. Stumpf, F.M. Vukovich, P.K. Fowler, and 
J.T. Turner, 1991: An expatriate red tide bloom: Trans­
port, distribution, and persistence. Limnology and Ocean­
ography, 36, 1053-1061.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.4319/lo.1991.36.5.1053/pdf
167.	 Hallegraeff, G.M., 1993: A review of harmful algae blooms 
and their apparent global increase. Phycologia, 32, 79-99. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2216/i0031-8884-32-2-79.1 
168.	 Van Dolah, F.M., 2000: Marine algal toxins: Origins, health 
effects, and their increased occurrence. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 108, 133-141. PMC1637787 
169.	 Sellner, K.G., G.J. Doucette, and G.J. Kirkpatrick, 2003: 
Harmful algal blooms: Causes, impacts and detection. Jour­
nal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, 30, 383-
406.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10295-003-0074-9 
170.	 Chateau-Degat, M.-L., M. Chinain, N. Cerf, S. Gingras, B. 
Hubert, and É. Dewailly, 2005: Seawater temperature, Gam­
bierdiscus spp. variability and incidence of ciguatera poi­
soning in French Polynesia. Harmful Algae, 4, 1053-1062. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2005.03.003 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
185
171.	 Gingold, D.B., M.J. Strickland, and J.J. Hess, 2014: Cigua­
tera fish poisoning and climate change: Analysis of National 
Poison Center Data in the United States, 2001–2011. Envi­
ronmental Health Perspectives, 122, 580-586.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1307196 
172.	 Tester, P.A., R.L. Feldman, A.W. Nau, S.R. Kibler, and R. 
Wayne Litaker, 2010: Ciguatera fish poisoning and sea sur­
face temperatures in the Caribbean Sea and the West Indies. 
Toxicon, 56, 698-710.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.toxi­
con.2010.02.026 
173.	 Litaker, R.W., M.W. Vandersea, M.A. Faust, S.R. Kibler, 
M. Chinain, M.J. Holmes, W.C. Holland, and P.A. Tester, 
2009: Taxonomy of Gambierdiscus including four new spe­
cies, Gambierdiscus caribaeus, Gambierdiscus carolinianus, 
Gambierdiscus carpenteri and Gambierdiscus ruetzleri 
(Gonyaulacales, Dinophyceae). Phycologia, 48, 344-390. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2216/07-15.1 
174.	 Hales, S., P. Weinstein, and A. Woodward, 1999: Cig­
uatera (fish poisoning), El Niño, and Pacific sea surface 
temperatures. Ecosystem Health, 5, 20-25.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1046/j.1526-0992.1999.09903.x 
175.	 Erdner, D.L., J. Dyble, M.L. Parsons, R.C. Stevens, K.A. 
Hubbard, M.L. Wrabel, S.K. Moore, K.A. Lefebvre, D.M. 
Anderson, P. Bienfang, R.R. Bidigare, M.S. Parker, P. Moeller, 
L.E. Brand, and V.L. Trainer, 2008: Centers for oceans and 
human health: A unified approach to the challenge of harm­
ful algal blooms. Environmental Health, 7, S2.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069X-7-S2-S2 
176.	 Moore, S.K., N.J. Mantua, B.M. Hickey, and V.L. Trainer, 
2010: The relative influences of El Niño-Southern Oscilla­
tion and Pacific Decadal Oscillation on paralytic shellfish 
toxin accumulation in northwest Pacific shellfish. Lim­
nology and Oceanography, 55, 2262-2274.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.4319/lo.2010.55.6.2262 
177.	 Moore, S.K., N.J. Mantua, and E.P. Salathé, Jr., 2011: Past 
trends and future scenarios for environmental conditions 
favoring the accumulation of paralytic shellfish toxins in 
Puget Sound shellfish. Harmful Algae, 10, 521-529.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2011.04.004 
178.	 Trainer, V.L., B.-T.L. Eberhart, J.C. Wekell, N.G. Adams, 
L. Hanson, F. Cox, and J. Dowell, 2003: Paralytic shellfish 
toxins in Puget Sound, Washington state. Journal of Shellfish 
Research, 22, 213-223.  
179.	 Hattenrath, T.K., D.M. Anderson, and C.J. Gobler, 2010: 
The influence of anthropogenic nitrogen loading and mete­
orological conditions on the dynamics and toxicity of Alex­
andrium fundyense blooms in a New York (USA) estuary. 
Harmful Algae, 9, 402-412.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
hal.2010.02.003 
180.	 Anderson, D.M., D.A. Couture, J.L. Kleindhinst, B.A. 
Keafer, D.J. McGillicuddy Jr., J.L. Martin, M.L. Richlen, 
J.M. Hickey, and A.R. Solow, 2014: Understanding inter­
annual, decadal level variability in paralytic shellfish poison­
ing toxicity in the Gulf of Maine: The HAB Index. Deep-
Sea Research II, 103, 264-276.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
dsr2.2013.09.018 
181.	 Nair, A., A.C. Thomas, and M.E. Borsuk, 2013: Interan­
nual variability in the timing of New England shellfish tox­
icity and relationships to environmental forcing. Science 
of The Total Environment, 447, 255-266.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.023 
182.	 Thomas, A.C., R. Weatherbee, H. Xue, and G. Liu, 2010: 
Interannual variability of shellfish toxicity in the Gulf of 
Maine: Time and space patterns and links to environmen­
tal variability. Harmful Algae, 9, 458-480.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.hal.2010.03.002 
183.	 McGillicuddy, D.J., Jr., D.W. Townsend, R. He, B.A. Keaf­
er, J.L. Kleindhinst, Y. Li, J.P. Manning, D.G. Mountain, 
M.A. Thomas, and D.M. Anderson, 2011: Suppression of 
the 2010 Alexandrium fundyense bloom by changes in physi­
cal, biological, and chemical properties of the Gulf of Maine. 
Limnology and Oceanography, 56, 2411-2426.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.4319/lo.2011.56.6.2411 
184.	 Parsons, M.L. and Q. Dortch, 2002: Sedimentological evi­
dence of an increase in Pseudo-nitzschia (Bacillariophyceae) 
abundance in response to coastal eutrophication. Limnology 
and Oceanography, 47, 551-558.  http://dx.doi.org/10.4319/
lo.2002.47.2.0551 
185.	 Fryxell, G.A., M.C. Villac, and L.P. Shapiro, 1997: The 
occurrence of the toxic diatom genus Pseudo-nitzschia (Bacil­
lariophyceae) on the West Coast of the USA, 1920–1996: A 
review. Phycologia, 36, 419-437.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2216/
i0031-8884-36-6-419.1 
186.	 Trainer, V.L., L. Moore, B.D. Bill, N.G. Adams, N. Har­
rington, J. Borchert, D.A.M. da Silva, and B.-T.L. Eberhart, 
2013: Diarrhetic shellfish toxins and other lipophilic toxins 
of human health concern in Washington state. Marine Drugs, 
11, 1815-1835.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/md11061815 
187.	 Belgrano, A., O. Lindahl, and B. Henroth, 1999: North 
Atlantic Oscillation primary productivity and toxic phyto­
plankton in the Gullmar Fjord, Sweden (1985-1996). Pro­
ceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 266, 425-
430.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1999.0655 
188.	 Anderson, D.M., A.D. Cembella, and G.M. Hallegraeff, 
2012: Progress in understanding harmful algal blooms: 
Paradigm shifts and new technologies for research, mon­
itoring, and management. Annual Review of  Marine Sci­
ence, 4, 143-76.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ma­
rine-120308-081121 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
186
189.	 Fu, F.X., A.O. Tatters, and D.A. Hutchins, 2012: Global 
change and the future of harmful algal blooms in the ocean. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 470, 207-233.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3354/meps10047 
190.	 Moore, S.K., V.L. Trainer, N.J. Mantua, M.S. Parker, E.A. 
Laws, L.C. Backer, and L.E. Fleming, 2008: Impacts of cli­
mate variability and future climate change on harmful algal 
blooms and human health. Environmental Health, 7, S4. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-7-S2-S4 
191.	 Hallegraeff, G.M., 2010: Ocean climate change, phytoplank­
ton community responses, and harmful algal blooms: A for­
midable predictive challenge. Journal of Phycology, 46, 220-
235.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1529-8817.2010.00815.x 
192.	 Backer, L.C. and S.K. Moore, 2012: Harmful algal blooms: 
Future threats in a warmer world. Environmental Pollution 
and Its Relation to Climate Change. El-Nemr, A., Ed. Nova 
Science Publishers, New York, 485-512.  
193.	 Laws, E.A., 2007: Climate change, oceans, and human 
health. Ocean Yearbook 21. Chircop, A., S. Coffen-Smout, 
and M. McConnell, Eds. Bridge Street Books, 129-175. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/221160007X00074 
194.	 Hays, G.C., A.J. Richardson, and C. Robinson, 2005: Cli­
mate change and marine plankton. TRENDS in Ecology 
and Evolution, 20, 337-344.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2005.03.004 
195.	 Berdalet, E., F. Peters, V.L. Koumandou, C. Roldán, Ó. 
Guadayol, and M. Estrada, 2007: Species-specific physio­
logical response of dinoflagellates to quantified small-scale 
turbulence. Journal of Phycology, 43, 965-977.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1529-8817.2007.00392.x 
196.	 Margalef, R., M. Estrada, and D. Blasco, 1979: Functional 
morphology of organisms involved in red tides, as adapted 
to decaying turbulence. Toxic Dinoflagellate Blooms. Tay­
lor, D.L. and H.H. Seliger, Eds. Elsevier North Holland, 
Amsterdam, 89-94.  
197.	 Hinder, S.L., G.C. Hays, M. Edwards, E.C. Roberts, A.W. 
Walne, and M.B. Gravenor, 2012: Changes in marine dino­
flagellate and diatom abundance under climate change. 
Nature Climate Change, 2, 271-275.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate1388 
198.	 Moore, S.K., J.A. Johnstone, N.S. Banas, and E.P.S. Jr., 2015: 
Present-day and future climate pathways affecting Alexandri­
um blooms in Puget Sound, WA, USA. Harmful Algae, 48, 
1-11.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2015.06.008 
199.	 Kibler, S.R., P.A. Tester, K.E. Kunkel, S.K. Moore, and R.W. 
Litaker, 2015: Effects of ocean warming on growth and dis­
tribution of dinoflagellates associated with ciguatera fish 
poisoning in the Caribbean. Ecological Modelling, 316, 194-
210.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.08.020 
200.	 VanDerslice, J., 2011: Drinking water infrastructure and 
environmental disparities: Evidence and methodological 
considerations. American Journal of Public Health, 101, 
S109-S114.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300189 
201.	 Balazs, C.L. and I. Ray, 2014: The drinking water disparities 
framework: On the origins and persistence of inequities in 
exposure. American Journal of Public Health, 104, 603-610. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301664 
202.	 Heaney, C.D., S. Wing, S.M. Wilson, R.L. Campbell, D. 
Caldwell, B. Hopkins, S. O’Shea, and K. Yeatts, 2013: Pub­
lic infrastructure disparities and the microbiological and 
chemical safety of drinking and surface water supplies in a 
community bordering a landfill. Journal of Environmental 
Health, 75, 24-36. PMC4514614 
203.	 Wilson, S.M., C.D. Heaney, and O. Wilson, 2010: Gov­
ernance structures and the lack of basic amenities: Can 
community engagement be effectively used to address 
environmental in justice in underserved Black commu­
nities? Environmental Justice, 3, 125-133.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/env.2010.0014 
204.	 Jepson, W., 2014: Measuring ‘no-win’ waterscapes: Expe­
rience-based scales and classification approaches to assess 
household water security in colonias on the US-Mexico bor­
der. Geoforum, 51, 107-120.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoforum.2013.10.002 
205.	 Wescoat, J.L., Jr.,, L. Headington, and R. Theobald, 2007: 
Water and poverty in the United States. Geoforum, 38, 801-
814.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2006.08.007 
206.	 Hennessy, T.W., T. Ritter, R.C. Holman, D.L. Bruden, K.L. 
Yorita, L. Bulkow, J.E. Cheek, R.J. Singleton, and J. Smith, 
2008: The relationship between in-home water service and 
the risk of respiratory tract, skin, and gastrointestinal tract 
infections among rural Alaska natives. American Journal of 
Public Health, 98, 2072-2078.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
ajph.2007.115618 
207.	 Furth, D.P., 2010: What’s in the water? Climate change, 
waterborne pathogens, and the safety of the rural Alaskan 
water supply. Hastings West-Northwest Journal of Environmen­
tal Law and Policy, 16, 251-276.  
208.	 Evengard, B., J. Berner, M. Brubaker, G. Mulvad, and B. 
Revich, 2011: Climate change and water security with a 
focus on the Arctic. Global Health Action, 4.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3402/gha.v4i0.8449 
209.	 Lane, K., K. Charles-Guzman, K. Wheeler, Z. Abid, N. Gra­
ber, and T. Matte, 2013: Health effects of coastal storms and 
flooding in urban areas: A review and vulnerability assess­
ment. Journal of Environmental and Public Health, 2013, Arti­
cle ID 913064.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/913064 

6–CLIMATE IMPACTS ON WATER-RELATED ILLNESS
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
187
210.	 Xu, Z., P.E. Sheffield, W. Hu, H. Su, W. Yu, X. Qi, and S. 
Tong, 2012: Climate change and children’s health—A call 
for research on what works to protect children. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Pulic Health, 9, 3298-
3316.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph9093298 
211.	 Bernstein, A.S. and S.S. Myers, 2011: Climate change and 
children’s health. Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 23, 221-
226.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283444c89 
212.	 Kistin, E.J., J. Fogarty, R.S. Pokrasso, M. McCally, and P.G. 
McCornick, 2010: Climate change, water resources and 
child health. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 95, 545-549. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/adc.2009.175307 
213.	 Lopman, B.A., A.J. Hall, A.T. Curns, and U.D. Parashar, 
2011: Increasing rates of gastroenteritis hospital discharges 
in US adults and the contribution of norovirus, 1996-2007. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 52, 466-474.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciq163 
214.	 Rylander, C., J.O. Odland, and T.M. Sandanger, 2013: Cli­
mate change and the potential effects on maternal and preg­
nancy outcomes: An assessment of the most vulnerable--the 
mother, fetus, and newborn child. Global Health Action, 6, 
19538.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/gha.v6i0.19538 
215.	 CDC, 2012: Cryptosporidiosis Surveillance —United 
States, 2009–2010 and Giardiasis Surveillance —United 
States, 2009–2010. MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 61(5), 
1-23.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6105.pdf 
216.	 Judd, N.L., C.H. Drew, C. Acharya, Marine Resources for 
Future Generations, T.A. Mitchell, J.L. Donatuto, G.W. 
Burns, T.M. Burbacher, and E.M. Faustman, 2005: Fram­
ing scientific analyses for risk management of environmental 
hazards by communities: Case studies with seafood safety 
issues. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113, 1502-1508. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7655 
217.	 Donatuto, J.L., T.A. Satterfield, and R. Gregory, 2011: Poi­
soning the body to nourish the soul: Prioritising health risks 
and impacts in a Native American community. Health, Risk 
& Society, 13, 103-127.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136985
75.2011.556186 
218.	 Lefebvre, K.A. and A. Robertson, 2010: Domoic acid and 
human exposure risks: A review. Toxicon, 56, 218-230. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.05.034 
219.	 Lewitus, A.J., R.A. Horner, D.A. Caron, E. Garcia-Mendo­
za, B.M. Hickey, M. Hunter, D.D. Huppert, R.M. Kudela, 
G.W. Langlois, J.L. Largier, E.J. Lessard, R. RaLonde, J.E.J. 
Rensel, P.G. Strutton, V.L. Trainer, and J.F. Tweddle, 2012: 
Harmful algal blooms along the North American west coast 
region: History, trends, causes, and impacts. Harmful Algae, 
19, 133-159.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2012.06.009 
220.	 Yoder, J.S., S. Straif-Bourgeois, S.L. Roy, T.A. Moore, G.S. 
Visvesvara, R.C. Ratard, V.R. Hill, J.D. Wilson, A.J. Lin­
scott, R. Crager, N.A. Kozak, R. Sriram, J. Narayanan, 
B. Mull, A.M. Kahler, C. Schneeberger, A.J. da Silva, M. 
Poudel, K.L. Baumgarten, L. Xiao, and M.J. Beach, 2012: 
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis deaths associated with 
sinus irrigation using contaminated tap water. Clinical Infec­
tious Diseases, 55, e79-e85.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/
cis626 
221.	 Kemble, S.K., R. Lynfield, A.S. DeVries, D.M. Drehner, 
W.F. Pomputius, M.J. Beach, G.S. Visvesvara, A.J. da Silva, 
V.R. Hill, J.S. Yoder, L. Xiao, K.E. Smith, and R. Danila, 
2012: Fatal Naegleria fowleri infection acquired in Minneso­
ta: Possible expanded range of a deadly thermophilic organ­
ism. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 54, 805-809.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/cir961 
222.	 Goudot, S., P. Herbelin, L. Mathieu, S. Soreau, S. Banas, 
and F. Jorand, 2012: Growth dynamic of Naegleria fowleri 
in a microbial freshwater biofilm. Water Research, 46, 3958-
3966.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.05.030 
223.	 Puzon, G.J., J.A. Lancaster, J.T. Wylie, and J.J. Plumb, 
2009: Rapid detection of Naegleria fowleri in water distri­
bution pipeline biofilms and drinking water supplies. Envi­
ronmental Science & Technology, 43, 6691-6696.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/es900432m 
224.	 Cope, J.R., R.C. Ratard, V.R. Hill, T. Sokol, J.J. Causey, J.S. 
Yoder, G. Mirani, B. Mull, K.A. Mukerjee, J. Narayanan, 
M. Doucet, Y. Qvarnstrom, C.N. Poole, O.A. Akingbola, J. 
Ritter, Z. Xiong, A. da Silva, D. Roellig, R. Van Dyke, H. 
Stern, L. Xiao, and M.J. Beach, 2015: First association of 
a primary amebic meningoencephalitis death with cultur­
able Naegleria fowleri in tap water from a US treated pub­
lic drinking water system. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 60, 
e36-e42.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ017 
225.	 Carrie, J., F. Wang, H. Sanei, R.W. Macdonald, P.M. Out­
ridge, and G.A. Stern, 2010: Increasing contaminant bur­
dens in an arctic fish, Burbot (Lota lota), in a warming 
climate. Environmental Science & Technology, 44, 316-322. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es902582y 
226.	 Balbus, J.M., A.B. Boxall, R.A. Fenske, T.E. McKone, and 
L. Zeise, 2013: Implications of global climate change for the 
assessment and management of human health risks of chem­
icals in the natural environment. Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry, 32, 62-78.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
etc.2046 

End
© Richard Ellis/Corbis

FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION,
AND DISTRIBUTION
7
THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES
A Scientific Assessment
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Lead Authors
Lewis Ziska
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Allison Crimmins*
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Contributing Authors
Allan Auclair
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Stacey DeGrasse
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Jada F. Garofalo
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ali S. Khan
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Irakli Loladze
Bryan College of Health Sciences
Adalberto A. Pérez de León
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Allan Showler
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Jeanette Thurston
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Isabel Walls
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Recommended Citation: Ziska, L., A. Crimmins, A. Auclair, S. DeGrasse, J.F. Garofalo, A.S. Khan, I. Loladze, A.A. Pérez de León, A. 
Showler, J. Thurston, and I. Walls, 2016: Ch. 7: Food Safety, Nutrition, and Distribution. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human 
Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 189–216. http://
dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0ZP4417
On the web: health2016.globalchange.gov
*Chapter Coordinators
Acknowledgements: Steve Gendel, Formerly of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
190
FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION,
AND DISTRIBUTION
7
Key Findings
Increased Risk of Foodborne Illness
Key Finding 1: Climate change, including rising temperatures and changes in weather extremes, is expected 
to increase the exposure of food to certain pathogens and toxins [Likely, High Confidence]. This will increase 
the risk of negative health impacts [Likely, Medium Confidence], but actual incidence of foodborne illness 
will depend on the efficacy of practices that safeguard food in the United States [High Confidence]. 
Chemical Contaminants in the Food Chain
Key Finding 2: Climate change will increase human exposure to chemical contaminants in food through 
several pathways [Likely, Medium Confidence]. Elevated sea surface temperatures will lead to greater 
accumulation of mercury in seafood [Likely, Medium Confidence], while increases in extreme weather 
events will introduce contaminants into the food chain [Likely, Medium Confidence]. Rising carbon dioxide 
concentrations and climate change will alter incidence and distribution of pests, parasites, and microbes 
[Very Likely, High Confidence], leading to increases in the use of pesticides and veterinary drugs [Likely, 
Medium Confidence].
Rising Carbon Dioxide Lowers Nutritional Value of Food
Key Finding 3: The nutritional value of agriculturally important food crops, such as wheat and rice, will 
decrease as rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide continue to reduce the concentrations of protein and 
essential minerals in most plant species [Very Likely, High Confidence].
Extreme Weather Limits Access to Safe Foods
Key Finding 4: Increases in the frequency or intensity of some extreme weather events associated with 
climate change will increase disruptions of food distribution by damaging existing infrastructure or slowing 
food shipments [Likely, High Confidence]. These impediments lead to increased risk for food damage, 
spoilage, or contamination, which will limit availability of and access to safe and nutritious food depending 
on the extent of disruption and the resilience of food distribution infrastructure [Medium Confidence].

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
191
7.1	 Introduction 
A safe and nutritious food supply is a vital component of food 
security. Food security, in a public health context, can be sum­
marized as permanent access to a sufficient, safe, and nutri­
tious food supply needed to maintain an active and healthy 
lifestyle.1 
The impacts of climate change on food production, prices, and 
trade for the United States and globally have been widely ex­
amined, including in the U.S. Global Change Research Program 
(USGCRP) report, “Climate Change, Global Food Security, and 
the U.S. Food System,” in the most recent Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change report, and elsewhere.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 An 
overall finding of the USGCRP report was that “climate change 
is very likely to affect global, regional, and local food security 
by disrupting food availability, decreasing access to food, and 
making utilization more difficult.”1 
Farm to Table
The Potential Interactions of Rising CO2 and Climate Change on Food Safety and Nutrition
Figure 1: The food system involves a network of interactions with our physical and biological environments as 
food moves from production to consumption, or from “farm to table.” Rising CO2 and climate change will affect 
the quality and distribution of food, with subsequent effects on food safety and nutrition. 
This chapter focuses on some of the less reported aspects of 
food security, specifically, the impacts of climate change on 
food safety, nutrition, and distribution in the context of human 
health in the United States. While ingestion of contaminated 
seafood is discussed in this chapter, details on the exposure 
pathways of water related pathogens (for example, through 
recreational or drinking water) are discussed in Chapter 6: 
Water-Related Illness.
Systems and processes related to food safety, nutrition, and 
production are inextricably linked to their physical and biologi­
cal environment.5, 8 Although production is important, for most 
developed countries such as the United States, food shortages 
are uncommon; rather, nutritional quality and food safety are 
the primary health concerns.5, 9 Certain populations, such as 
the poor, children, and Indigenous populations, may be more 
vulnerable to climate impacts on food safety, nutrition, and 
distribution (see also Ch. 9: Populations of Concern). 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
192
There are two overarching means by which increasing carbon 
dioxide (CO2) and climate change alter safety, nutrition, and 
distribution of food. The first is associated with rising global 
temperatures and the subsequent changes in weather patterns 
and extreme climate events.13, 14, 15 Current and anticipated 
changes in climate and the physical environment have con­
sequences for contamination, spoilage, and the disruption of 
food distribution. 
The second pathway is through the direct CO2 “fertilization” 
effect on plant photosynthesis. Higher concentrations of CO2 
stimulate growth and carbohydrate production in some plants, 
but can lower the levels of protein and essential minerals in a 
number of widely consumed crops, including wheat, rice, and 
potatoes, with potentially negative implications for human 
nutrition.16 
Figure 2: This conceptual diagram for a Salmonella example illustrates the key pathways by which humans are exposed to health 
threats from climate drivers, and potential resulting health outcomes (center boxes). These exposure pathways exist within the context 
of other factors that positively or negatively influence health outcomes (gray side boxes). Key factors that influence vulnerability for 
individuals are shown in the right box, and include social determinants of health and behavioral choices. Key factors that influence 
vulnerability at larger scales, such as natural and built environments, governance and management, and institutions, are shown in 
the left box. All of these influencing factors can affect an individual’s or a community’s vulnerability through changes in exposure, 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity and may also be affected by climate change. See Ch. 1: Introduction for more information.
Climate Change and Health—Salmonella
Food Safety – Those conditions and measures 
necessary for food production, processing, 
storage, and distribution in order to ensure a safe, 
sound, wholesome product that is fit for human 
consumption.10
Foodborne Illness or Disease – Foodborne illness 
(sometimes called “food poisoning”) is a common 
public health problem. Each year, one in six 
Americans reports getting sick by consuming 
contaminated foods or beverages.11 Foodborne 
disease is caused by ingestion of contaminated 
food. Many different disease-causing microbes, or 
pathogens, can contaminate foods, so there are 
many different foodborne infections. In addition, 
food contaminated by toxins or chemicals can also 
result in foodborne illness.12
Terminology

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
193
7.2	 Food Safety
Although the United States has one of the safest food supplies 
in the world,17 food safety remains an important public health 
issue. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) estimate that there are 48 million cases 
of foodborne illnesses per year, with approximately 3,000 
deaths.12 As climate change drives changes in environmental 
variables such as ambient temperature, precipitation, and 
weather extremes (particularly flooding and drought), increas­
es in foodborne illnesses are expected.18, 19
Most acute illnesses are caused by foodborne viruses (specif­
ically noroviruses), followed by bacterial pathogens (such as 
Salmonella; see Table 1). Of the common foodborne illnesses 
in the United States, most deaths are caused by Salmonella, 
followed by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii.20, 21, 22, 23 In addition, 
climate change impacts on the transport of chemical contam­
inants or accumulation of pesticides or heavy metals (such as 
mercury) in food, can also represent significant health threats 
in the food chain.22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28
How Climate Affects Food Safety
Climate already influences food safety within an agricultural 
system—prior to, during, and after the harvest, and during 
transport, storage, preparation, and consumption. Changes 
in climate factors, such as temperature, precipitation, and ex­
treme weather are key drivers of pathogen introduction, food 
contamination, and foodborne disease, as well as changes in 
the level of exposure to specific contaminants and chemical 
residues for crops and livestock.29, 30, 31 
The impact of climate on food safety occurs through multiple 
pathways. Changes in air and water temperatures, weath­
er-related changes, and extreme events can shift the sea­
sonal and geographic occurrence of bacteria, viruses, pests, 
parasites, fungi, and other chemical contaminants.23, 30, 31, 32, 33 
For example:
•	 Higher temperatures can increase the number of pathogens 
already present on produce34 and seafood.35, 36 
Figure 3: A review of the published literature from 1960 to 2010 indicates a summertime peak in the incidence of illnesses associated 
with infection from a) Campylobacter, b) Salmonella, and c) Escherichia coli (E. coli). For these three pathogens, the monthly 
seasonality index shown here on the y-axis indicates the global disease incidence above or below the yearly average, which is 
denoted as 100. For example, a value of 145 for the month of July for Salmonellosis would mean that the proportion of cases for 
that month was 45% higher than the 12 month average. Unlike these three pathogens, incidence of norovirus, which can be attained 
through food, has a wintertime peak. The y-axis of the norovirus incidence graph (d) uses a different metric than (a–c): the monthly 
proportion of the annual sum of norovirus cases in the northern hemisphere between 1997 and 2011. For example, a value of 0.12 
for March would indicate that 12% of the annual cases occurred during that month). Solid line represents the average; confidence 
intervals (dashed lines) are plus and minus one standard deviation. (Figure sources: a, b, and c: adapted from Lal et al. 2012; d: 
Ahmed et al. 2013)49, 183
Seasonality of Human Illnesses Associated With Foodborne Pathogens 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
194
Table 1. Foodborne Illness and Climate Change 
Foodborne Hazard
Symptoms
Estimated Annual 
Illness and Disease
Other Climate 
Drivers
Temperature/ 
Humidity 
Relationship
Norovirus
Vomiting, non-bloody diarrhea with 
abdominal pain, nausea, aches, 
low grade fever
•	 5,500,000 illnesses
•	 15,000 hospitalizations 
•	 150 deaths 
Extreme 
weather events 
(such as heavy 
precipitation and 
flooding)
Pathogens 
Favoring Colder/
Dryer 
Conditions


Pathogens 
Favoring Warmer/
Wetter Conditions
Listeria 
monocytogene
Fever, muscle aches, and rarely 
diarrhea. Intensive infection can 
lead to miscarriage, stillbirth, 
premature delivery, or life-
threatening infections (meningitis).
•	 1,600 illnesses
•	 1,500 hospitalizations
•	 260 deaths 
Toxoplasma
Minimal to mild illness with fever, 
serious illness in rare cases. 
Inflammation of the brain and 
infection of other organs, birth 
defects.
•	 87,000 illnesses
•	 4,400 hospitalizations 
•	 330 deaths
Campylobacter
Diarrhea, cramping, abdominal 
pain, nausea, and vomiting. 
In serious cases can be life-
threatening.
•	 850,000 illnesses
•	 8,500 hospitalizations
•	 76 deaths
Changes in the 
timing or length 
of seasons, 
precipitation and 
flooding
Salmonella spp. 
(non typhoidal)
Diarrhea, fever, and abdominal 
cramps; in severe cases death.
•	 1,000,000 illnesses 
•	 19,000 hospitalizations
•	 380 deaths 
Extreme weather 
events, changes 
in the timing or 
length of seasons
Vibrio vulnificus 
and 
parahaemolyticus
When ingested: watery diarrhea 
often with abdominal cramping, 
nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. 
Can cause liver disease. When 
exposed to an open wound: 
infection of the skin.
•	 35,000 illnesses
•	 190 hospitalizations 
•	 40 deaths
Sea surface 
temperature, 
extreme weather 
events
Escherichia coli 
(E coli)
E. coli usually causes mild 
diarrhea. More severe pathogenic 
types, such as enterohemorrhagic 
E. Coli (EHEC), are associated with 
hemolytic uremic syndrome (a toxin 
causing destruction of red blood 
cells, leading to kidney failure).
•	 200,000 illnesses 
•	 2,400 hospitalizations
•	 20 deaths
Extreme weather 
events, changes 
in the timing or 
length of seasons
Estimated annual number of foodborne illnesses and deaths in the United States. (Adapted from Scallan et al. 
2011; Akil et al. 2014; Kim et al. 2015; Lal et al. 2012)20, 48, 49, 80 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
195
•	 Bacterial populations can increase during food storage 
which, depending on time and temperature, can also in­
crease food spoilage rates.37 
•	 Sea surface temperature is directly related to seafood expo­
sure to pathogens (see Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness).38, 39, 40 
•	 Precipitation has been identified as a factor in the contam­
ination of irrigation water and produce,30, 31, 33, 41 which has 
been linked to foodborne illness outbreaks.42, 43 
•	 Extreme weather events like dust storms or flooding can 
introduce toxins to crops during development (see Ch. 4: 
Extreme Events).44 
•	 Changing environmental conditions and soil properties may 
result in increases in the incidence of heavy metals in the 
food supply.45, 46, 47
Climate Impacts on Pathogen Prevalence
While climate change affects the prevalence of pathogens 
harmful to human health, the extent of exposure and result­
ing illness will depend on individual and institutional sensitiv­
ity and adaptive capacity, including human behavior and the 
effectiveness of food safety regulatory, surveillance, monitor­
ing, and communication systems.
Rising Temperature and Humidity
Climate change will influence the fate, transport, transmission, 
viability, and multiplication rate of pathogens in the food chain. 
For example, increases in average global temperatures and 
humidity will lead to changes in the geographic range, seasonal 
occurrence, and survivability of certain pathogens.9, 48, 49, 50
Ongoing changes in temperature 
and humidity will not affect all 
foodborne pathogens equal­
ly (Table 1). The occurrence 
of some pathogens, such as 
Salmonella, Escherichia coli (E. 
coli), and Campylobacter, could 
increase with climate change be­
cause these pathogens thrive in warm, humid conditions. For 
example, Salmonella on raw chicken will double in number 
approximately every hour at 70°F, every 30 minutes at 80°F, 
and every 22 minutes at 90°F.51, 52 
There is a summertime peak in the incidence of illnesses 
associated with these specific pathogens (see Figure 3).18, 48, 53, 
54 This peak may be related not only to warmer temperatures 
favoring pathogen growth but also to an increase in outdoor 
activities, such as barbecues and picnics. Risk for foodborne 
illness is higher when food is prepared outdoors where the 
safety controls that a kitchen provides—thermostat-con­
trolled cooking, refrigeration, and washing facilities—are 
usually not available.5, 18, 19, 48, 55, 56 
Norovirus, the most common cause of stomach flu, can be 
transmitted by consumption of contaminated food. Although 
norovirus generally has a winter seasonal peak (see Figure 
3), changing climate parameters, particularly temperature 
and rainfall, may influence its incidence and spread. Overall, 
localized climate impacts could improve health outcomes 
(fewer cases during warmer winters) or worsen them (elevat­
ed transmission during floods), such that projected trends in 
overall health outcomes for norovirus remain unclear.48, 57
Rising ocean temperatures can increase the risk of pathogen 
exposure from ingestion of contaminated seafood. For exam­
ple, significantly warmer coastal waters in Alaska from 1997 
to 2004 were associated with an outbreak in 2004 of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus, a bacterium that causes gastrointestinal 
illnesses when contaminated seafood is ingested.58 Vibrio par­
ahaemolyticus is one of the leading causes of seafood-related 
gastroenteritis in the United States and is associated with the 
consumption of raw oysters harvested from warm-water estu­
aries.59 Similarly, the emergence of a related bacterium, Vibrio 
vulnificus, may also be associated with high water tempera­
tures.40 While increasing average water temperatures were 
implicated in a 2004 outbreak,58 ambient air temperature also 
affects pathogen levels of multiple species of Vibrio in shell­
fish.35, 36 For example, Vibrio vulnificus may increase 10- to 
100-fold when oysters are stored at ambient temperatures for 
ten hours before refrigeration.60 Increases in ambient ocean 
water and air temperatures would accelerate Vibrio growth 
in shellfish, potentially necessitating changes in post-harvest 
controls to minimize the increased risk of exposure. (For more 
information on Vibrio and other 
water-related pathogens, includ­
ing contamination of recreation­
al and drinking water, see Ch. 6: 
Water-Related Illness). 
Finally, climate change is 
projected to result in warmer 
winters, earlier springs, and an 
increase in the overall growing season in many regions.61, 62 
While there are potential food production benefits from such 
changes, warmer and longer growing seasons could also alter 
the timing and occurrence of pathogen transmissions in food 
and the chance of human exposure.63, 64, 65 
Extreme Events
In addition to the effects of increasing average temperature 
and humidity on pathogen survival and growth, increases in 
temperature and precipitation extremes can contribute to 
changes in pathogen transmission, multiplication, and surviv­
ability. More frequent and severe heavy rainfall events can in­
Climate change will influence the fate, 
transport, transmission, viability, and 
multiplication rate of pathogens in the
 food chain.

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
196
crease infection risk from most pathogens, particularly when it 
leads to flooding.66 Flooding, and other weather extremes, can 
increase the incidence and levels of pathogens in food produc­
tion, harvesting, and processing environments. Groundwater 
and surface water used for irrigation, harvesting, and washing 
can be contaminated with runoff or flood waters that carry par­
tially or untreated sewage, manure, or other wastes containing 
foodborne contaminants.55, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71 The level of Salmonella in 
water is elevated during times of monthly maximum precip­
itation in the summer and fall months;56, 72 consequently the 
likelihood of Salmonella in water may increase in regions expe­
riencing increased total or heavy precipitation events. 
Water is also an important factor in food processing. Climate 
and weather extremes, such as flooding or drought, can reduce 
water quality and increase the risk of pathogen transfer during 
the handling and storage of food following harvest.9 
The direct effect of drought on food safety is less clear. Dry 
conditions can pose a risk for pathogen transmission due to 
reduced water quality, increased risk of runoff when rains 
do occur, and increased pathogen concentration in reduced 
water supplies if such water is used for irrigation, food pro­
cessing, or livestock management.29, 31, 55, 73 Increasing drought 
generally leads to an elevated risk of exposure to pathogens 
such as norovirus and Cryptosporidium.66 However, drought 
and extreme heat events could also decrease the survivability 
of certain foodborne pathogens, affecting establishment and 
transmission, and thus reducing human exposure.66, 74
Mycotoxins and Phycotoxins
Mycotoxins are toxic chemicals produced by molds that grow 
on crops prior to harvest and during storage. Prior to harvest, 
increasing temperatures and drought can stress plants, mak­
ing them more susceptible to mold growth.75 Warm and moist 
conditions favor mold growth directly and affect the biology 
of insect vectors that transmit molds to crops. Post-harvest 
contamination is also affected by environmental parameters, 
including extreme temperatures and moisture. If crops are 
not dried and stored at low humidity, mold growth and myco­
toxin production can increase to very high levels.76, 77 
Phycotoxins are toxic chemicals produced by certain harmful 
freshwater and marine algae that may affect the safety of 
drinking water and shellfish or other seafood. For example, 
the alga responsible for producing ciguatoxin (the toxin that 
causes the illness known as ciguatera fish poisoning) thrives 
in warm water (see also Ch. 6: Water-Related Illness). Pro­
jected increases in sea surface temperatures may expand the 
endemic range of ciguatoxin-producing algae and increase 
ciguatera fish poisoning incidence following ingestion.78 Pre­
dicted increases in sea surface temperature of 4.5° to 6.3°F 
(2.5° to 3.5°C) could yield increases in ciguatera fish poisoning 
cases of 200% to 400%.79 
Crop dusting of a corn field in Iowa.
Climate change will expand the geographical range 
where mold growth and mycotoxin production 
occur.9, 32, 37, 75 Corn, a major U.S. crop, is especially 
susceptible to mold growth and mycotoxin 
production.81 Human dietary exposure to these toxins 
has resulted in illness and death in tropical regions, 
or where their presence remains unregulated.82 In the 
United States, regulations are designed to prevent 
mycotoxins entering the food supply. 
Aflatoxins (naturally occurring mycotoxins found 
in corn) are known carcinogens and can also 
cause impaired development in children, immune 
suppression, and, with severe exposure, death.82, 83, 84 
Recent models show that aflatoxin contamination in 
corn may increase with climate change in Europe.85 
Other commodities susceptible to contamination by 
mycotoxins include peanuts, cereal grains, and fruit.37
Crops Susceptible to Mycotoxin Infections

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
197
Once introduced into the food chain, these poisonous toxins 
can result in adverse health outcomes, with both acute and 
chronic effects. Current regulatory laws and management 
strategies safeguard the food supply from mycotoxins and 
phycotoxins; however, increases in frequency and range of 
their prevalence may increase the vulnerability of the food 
safety system. 
Climate Impacts on Chemical Contaminants 
Climate change will affect human exposure to metals, pesti­
cides, pesticide residues, and other chemical contaminants. 
However, resulting incidence of illness will depend on the 
genetic predisposition of the person exposed, type of contam­
inant, and extent of exposure over time.86
Metals and Other Chemical Contaminants
There are a number of environmental contaminants, such as 
polychlorinated biphenyls, persistent organic pollutants, diox­
ins, pesticides, and heavy metals, which pose a human health 
risk when they enter the food chain. Extreme events may 
facilitate the entry of such contaminants into the food chain, 
particularly during heavy precipitation and flooding.45, 46, 47 For 
example, chemical contaminants in floodwater following Hur­
ricane Katrina included spilled oil, pesticides, heavy metals, 
and hazardous waste.47, 87
Methylmercury is a form of mercury that can be absorbed 
into the bodies of animals, including humans, where it can 
have adverse neurological effects. Elevated water tempera­
tures may lead to higher concentrations of methylmercury in 
fish and mammals.88, 89 This is related to an increase in met­
abolic rates and increased mercury uptake at higher water 
temperatures.28, 90, 91 Human exposure to dietary mercury is 
influenced by the amount of mercury ingested, which can 
vary with the species, age, and size of the fish. If future fish 
consumption patterns are unaltered, increasing ocean tem­
perature would likely increase mercury exposure in human 
diets. Methylmercury exposure can affect the development of 
children, particularly if exposed in utero.92 
Pesticides
Climate change is likely to exhibit a wide range of effects on 
the biology of plant and livestock pests (weeds, insects, and 
microbes). Rising minimum winter temperatures and longer 
growing seasons are very likely to alter pest distribution and 
populations.93, 94, 95 In addition, rising average temperature and 
CO2 concentration are also likely to increase the range and 
distribution of pests, their impact, and the vulnerability of host 
plants and animals.3, 96, 97
Pesticides are chemicals generally regulated for use in agri­
culture to protect plants and animals from pests; chemical 
management is the primary means for agricultural pest control 
in the United States and most developed countries. Because 
climate and CO2 will intensify pest distribution and popula­
tions,98, 99 increases in pesticide use are expected.100, 101 In ad­
dition, the efficacy of chemical management may be reduced 
in the context of climate change. This decline in efficacy can 
reflect CO2-induced increases in the herbicide tolerance of cer­
tain weeds or climate-induced shifts in invasive weed, insect, 
Protein. Protein content of major food crops is very 
likely to decline significantly as atmospheric CO2 
concentrations increase to between 540 and 960 
parts per million (ppm),129, 134, 135, 137 the range 
projected by the end of this century (see description of 
Representative Concentration Pathways in Appendix 1: 
Technical Support Document).14 Current atmospheric 
concentrations of CO2 are approximately 400 ppm.138 
Minerals and trace elements. Rising CO2 levels are very 
likely to lower the concentrations of essential micro- and 
macroelements such as iron, zinc, calcium, magnesium, 
copper, sulfur, phosphorus, and nitrogen in most plants 
(including major cereals and staple crops).16, 128, 132, 133, 
139, 140
Ratio of major macronutrients (carbohydrates to protein). It is very likely that rising CO2 will alter the relative proportions 
of major macronutrients in many crops by increasing carbohydrate content (starch and sugars) while at the same 
time decreasing protein content.16 An increase in dietary carbohydrates-to-protein ratio can have unhealthy effects on 
human metabolism and body mass.136, 141, 142, 143 
Impacts of Rising CO2 on the Nutritional Value of Crops
Wheat grown in southeast Washington state, August, 2008.

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
198
and plant pathogen populations100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108 as well as 
climate-induced changes that enhance pesticide degradation or 
affect coverage.108, 109 
Increased pest pressures and reductions in the efficacy of pesti­
cides are likely to lead to increased pesticide use, contamination 
in the field, and exposure within the food chain.110 Increased 
exposure to pesticides could have implications for human health.5, 
29, 44 However, the extent of pesticide use and potential exposure 
may also reflect climate change induced choices for crop selection 
and land use.
Pesticide Residues 
Climate change, especially increases in temperature, may be 
important in altering the transmission of vector-borne diseases 
in livestock by influencing the life cycle, range, 
and reproductive success of disease vectors.8, 65 
Potential changes in veterinary practices, including 
an increase in the use of parasiticides and other 
animal health treatments, are likely to be adopt­
ed to maintain livestock health in response to 
climate-induced changes in pests, parasites, and 
microbes.5, 23, 110 This could increase the risk of pes­
ticides entering the food chain or lead to evolution 
of pesticide resistance, with subsequent implica­
tions for the safety, distribution, and consumption 
of livestock and aquaculture products.111, 112, 113
Climate change may affect aquatic animal health 
through temperature-driven increases in dis­
ease.114 The occurrence of increased infections 
in aquaculture with rising temperature has been 
observed for some diseases (such as Ichthyoph­
thirius multifiliis and Flavobacterium columnare)115 
and is likely to result in greater use of aquaculture 
drugs.76 
7.3	 Nutrition
While sufficient quantity of food is an obvious 
requirement for food security, food quality is 
essential to fulfill basic nutritional needs. Globally, 
chronic dietary deficiencies of micronutrients such 
as vitamin A, iron, iodine, and zinc contribute to 
“hidden hunger,” in which the consequences of the 
micronutrient insufficiency may not be immediate­
ly visible or easily observed. This type of micro­
nutrient deficiency constitutes one of the world’s 
leading health risk factors and adversely affects 
metabolism, the immune system, cognitive devel­
opment and maturation—particularly in children. 
In addition, micronutrient deficiency can exacer­
bate the effects of diseases and can be a factor in 
prevalence of obesity.116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 
In developed countries with abundant food supplies, like 
the United States, the health burden of malnutrition may 
not be intuitive and is often underappreciated. In the 
United States, although a number of foods are supple­
mented with nutrients, it is estimated that the diets of 
38% and 45% of the population fall below the estimat­
ed average requirements for calcium and magnesium, 
respectively.122 Approximately 12% of the population is at 
risk for zinc deficiency, including perhaps as much as 40% 
of the elderly.123 In addition, nutritional deficiencies of 
magnesium, iron, selenium, and other essential micro­
nutrients can occur in overweight and obese individuals, 
whose diets might reflect excessive intake of calories and 
refined carbohydrates but insufficient intake of vitamins 
and essential minerals.119, 124, 125, 126 
Figure 4: Direct effect of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) 
on the concentrations of protein and minerals in crops. The top 
figure shows that the rise in CO2 concentration from 293 ppm (at the 
beginning of the last century) to 385 ppm (global average in 2008) 
to 715 ppm (projected to occur by 2100 under the RCP8.5 and 
RCP6.0 pathways),184 progressively lowers protein concentrations in 
wheat flour (the average of four varieties of spring wheat). The lower 
figure—the average effect on 125 plant species and cultivars—
shows that a doubling of CO2 concentration from preindustrial 
levels diminishes the concentration of essential minerals in wild and 
crop plants, including ionome (all the inorganic ions present in an 
organism) levels, and also lowers protein concentrations in barley, 
rice, wheat and potato. (Figure source: Experimental data from Ziska 
et al. 2004 (top figure), Taub et al. 2008, and Loladze 2014 (bottom 
figure)).16, 129, 134
Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Protein and Minerals

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
199
7.4	 Distribution and Access
A reliable and resilient food distribution system is essential 
for access to a safe and nutritious food supply. Access to food 
is characterized by transportation and availability, which are 
defined by infrastructure, trade management, storage re­
quirements, government regulation, and other socioeconomic 
factors.146 
The shift in recent decades to a more global food market 
has resulted in a greater dependency on food transport and 
distribution, particularly for growing urban populations. 
Consequently, any climate-related disturbance to food distri­
bution and transport may have significant impacts not only 
on safety and quality but also on food access. The effects of 
climate change on each of these interfaces will differ based 
on geographic, social, and economic factors.4 Ultimately, the 
outcome of climate-related disruptions and damages to the 
food transportation system will be strongly influenced by the 
resilience of the system, as well as the adaptive capacity of 
individuals, populations, and institutions. 
How Extreme Events Affect Food 
Distribution and Access
Projected increases in the frequency or severity of some 
extreme events will interrupt food delivery, particularly for vul­
nerable transport routes.13, 15, 147, 148 The degree of disruption is 
related to three factors: a) popularity of the transport pathway, 
b) availability of alternate routes, and c) timing or seasonality 
of the extreme event.149 As an example, the food transportation 
system in the United States frequently moves large volumes 
of grain by water. In the case of an extreme weather event 
affecting a waterway, there are few, if any, alternate pathways 
for transport.150 This presents an especially relevant risk to food 
access if an extreme event, like flooding or drought, coincides 
with times of agricultural distribution, such as the fall harvest. 
Immediately following an extreme event, food supply and safe­
ty can be compromised.150, 151, 152 Hurricanes or other storms can 
disrupt food distribution infrastructure, damage food supplies,7 
and limit access to safe and nutritious food, even in areas 
not directly affected by such events (see also Ch. 4: Extreme 
Events).153 For example, the Gulf Coast transportation network 
is vulnerable to storm surges of 23 feet.154 Following Hurricane 
Katrina in 2005, where storm surges of 25 to 28 feet were 
recorded along parts of the Gulf Coast, grain transportation by 
rail or barge was severely slowed due to physical damage to 
infrastructure and the displacement of employees.151, 155 Bar­
riers to food transport may also affect food markets, reaching 
consumers in the form of increased food costs.156 
The risk for food spoilage and contamination in storage facili­
ties, supermarkets, and homes is likely to increase due to the 
impacts of extreme weather events, particularly those that re­
sult in power outages, which may expose food to ambient tem­
How Rising CO2 Affects Nutrition
Though rising CO2 stimulates plant growth and carbohydrate 
production, it reduces the nutritional value (protein and 
minerals) of most food crops (Figure 4).16, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133 
This direct effect of rising CO2 on the nutritional value of crops 
represents a potential threat to human health.16, 133, 134, 135, 136
Protein
As CO2 increases, plants need less protein for photosynthesis, 
resulting in an overall decline in protein concentration in plant 
tissues.134, 135 This trend for declining protein levels is evident for 
wheat flour derived from multiple wheat varieties when grown 
under laboratory conditions simulating the observed increase 
in global atmospheric CO2 concentration since 1900.129 When 
grown at the CO2 levels projected for 2100 (540–958 ppm), ma­
jor food crops, such as barley, wheat, rice, and potato, exhibit 
6% to 15% lower protein concentrations relative to ambient 
levels (315–400 ppm).16, 134, 135 In contrast, protein content is not 
anticipated to decline significantly for corn or sorghum.135
While protein is an essential aspect of human dietary needs, 
the projected human health impacts of a diet including plants 
with reduced protein concentration from increasing CO2 are not 
well understood and may not be of considerable threat in the 
United States, where dietary protein deficiencies are uncom­
mon.
Micronutrients
The ongoing increase in atmospheric CO2 is also very likely to 
deplete other elements essential to human health (such as 
calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, and zinc) by 5% to 10% in 
most plants.16 The projected decline in mineral concentrations 
in crops has been attributed to at least two distinct effects of 
elevated CO2 on plant biology. First, rising CO2 increases carbo­
hydrate accumulation in plant tissues, which can, in turn, dilute 
the content of other nutrients, including minerals. Second, high 
CO2 concentrations reduce plant demands for water, resulting 
in fewer nutrients being drawn into plant roots.133, 144, 145
The ongoing increase in CO2 concentrations reduces the 
amount of essential minerals per calorie in most crops, thus 
reducing nutrient density. Such a reduction in crop quality 
may aggravate existing nutritional deficiencies, particularly 
for populations with pre-existing health conditions (see Ch. 9: 
Populations of Concern).
Carbohydrate-to-Protein Ratio
Elevated CO2 tends to increase the concentrations of carbo­
hydrates (starch and sugars) and reduce the concentrations 
of protein.134 The overall effect is a significant increase in the 
ratio of carbohydrates to protein in plants exposed to increas­
ing CO2.16 There is growing evidence that a dietary increase in 
this ratio can adversely affect human metabolism143 and body 
composition.141 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
200
peratures inadequate for safe storage.152 Storm-related power 
grid disruptions have steadily increased since 2000.157 Between 
2002 and 2012, extreme weather caused 58% of power outage 
events, 87% of which affected 50,000 or more customers.157 
Power outages are often linked to an increase in illness. For 
example, in August of 2003, a sudden power outage affected 
over 60 million people in the northeastern United States and 
Canada. New York City’s Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene detected a statistically significant citywide increase in 
diarrheal illness resulting from consumption of spoiled foods 
due to lost refrigeration capabilities.158
7.5	 Populations of Concern 
Climate change, combined with other social, economic, and 
political conditions, may increase the vulnerability of many 
different populations to food insecurity or food-related ill­
ness.163 However, not all populations are equally vulnerable.7, 
62 Infants and young children, pregnant women, the elderly, 
low-income populations, agricultural workers, and those with 
weakened immune systems or who have underlying medi­
cal conditions are more susceptible to the effects of climate 
change on food safety, nutrition, and access. 
Children may be especially vulnerable because they eat more 
food by body weight than adults, and do so during important 
stages of physical and mental growth and development. Chil­
dren are also more susceptible to severe infection or compli­
cations from E. coli infections, such as hemolytic uremic syn­
drome.164, 165, 166 Agricultural field workers, especially pesticide 
applicators, may experience increased exposure as pesticide 
applications increase with rising pest loads, which could also 
lead to higher pesticide levels in the children of these field 
workers.167, 168 People living in low-income urban areas, those 
with limited access to supermarkets,169, 170 and the elderly 
may have difficulty accessing safe and nutritious food after 
disruptions associated with extreme weather events. Climate 
change will also affect U.S. Indigenous peoples’ access to both 
wild and cultivated traditional foods associated with their 
nutrition, cultural practices, local economies, and communi­
ty health171 (see also Ch. 6 Water-Related Illness and Ch. 9: 
Populations of Concern). All of the health impacts described 
in this chapter can have significant consequences on mental 
health and well-being (see Ch. 8 Mental Health).
The summer (June through August) of 2012 was the 
second hottest on record for the contiguous United 
States.159 High temperatures and a shortage of rain led 
to one of the most severe summer droughts the nation 
has seen and posed serious impacts to the Mississippi 
River watershed, a major transcontinental shipping route for Midwestern agriculture.160, 161 This drought resulted 
in significant food and economic losses due to reductions in barge traffic, the volume of goods carried, and the 
number of Americans employed by the tugboat industry.162 The 2012 drought was immediately followed by flooding 
throughout the Mississippi in the spring of 2013, which also resulted in disruptions of barge traffic and food 
transport. These swings in precipitation, from drought to flooding, are consistent with projected increases in the 
frequency or severity of some types of extreme weather under continued climate change.7, 62, 152
Case Study: Extreme Drought and the Mississippi River, 2012
Figure 5: Mississippi River gauge height at St. Louis, MO, 
from October 2007 through October 2014 showing low water 
conditions during the 2012 drought and water levels above 
flood stage in 2013. (Figure source: adapted from USGS 
2015)185
Low water conditions on Mississippi River near St. Louis, 
MO, on December 5, 2012. Photo source: St. Louis 
District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Mississippi River Level at St. Louis, Missouri

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
201
7.6	 Emerging Issues 
Climate and food allergies. Food allergies in the United States 
currently affect between 1% and 9% of the population,172 but 
have increased significantly among children under age 18 since 
1997.173 Rising CO2 levels can reduce protein content and alter 
protein composition in certain plants, which has the potential 
to alter allergenic sensitivity. For example, rising CO2 has been 
shown to increase the concentration of the Amb a 1 protein—
the allergenic protein most associated with ragweed pollen.174 
However, at present, the question of how rising levels of CO2 
and climate change affect allergenic properties of food is un­
certain and requires more research.175
Heavy metals. Arsenic and other heavy metals occur naturally 
in some groundwater sources.176 Climate change can exacer­
bate drought and competition for water, resulting in the use of 
poorer-quality water sources.177, 178 Because climate and rising 
CO2 levels can also influence the extent of water loss through 
the crop canopy, poorer water quality could lead to changes 
in the concentrations of arsenic and potentially other heavy 
metals (like cadmium and selenium) in plant tissues. Addition­
al information is needed to determine how rising levels of CO2 
and climate change affect heavy metal accumulation in food 
and the consequences for human exposure. 
Zoonosis and livestock. Zoonotic diseases, which are spread 
from animals to humans, can be transmitted through direct 
contact with an infected animal or through the consumption of 
contaminated food or water. Climate change could potentially 
increase the rate of zoonoses, through environmental change 
that alters the biology or evolutionary rate of disease vectors 
or the health of animal hosts. The impact of rising levels of CO2 
and climate change on the transmission of disease through 
zoonosis remains a fundamental issue of potential global 
consequence. 
Foodborne pathogen contamination of fresh produce by insect 
vectors. Climate change will alter the range and distribution of 
insects and other microorganisms that can transmit bacte­
rial pathogens such as Salmonella to fresh produce.179, 180, 181 
Additional information is needed regarding the role of climate 
change on the transmission to and development of food 
pathogens through insect vectors. 
7.7	 Research Needs
In addition to the emerging issues identified above, the 
authors highlight the following potential areas for additional 
scientific and research activity on food safety, nutrition and 
distribution, based on their review of the literature. Under­
standing climate change impacts in the context of the current 
food safety infrastructure will be improved by enhanced 
surveillance of foodborne diseases and contaminant levels, 
improved understanding of CO2 impacts on nutritional quality 
of food, and more accurate models of the impacts of extreme 
events on food access and delivery. 
Future assessments can benefit from research activities that:
•	 synthesize and assess efforts to identify and respond to cur­
rent and projected food safety concerns and their impacts 
on human health within the existing and future food safety 
infrastructure;
•	 develop, test, and expand integrated assessment models 
to enhance understanding of climate and weather vari­
ability, particularly extreme events, and the role of human 
responses, including changes in farming technology and 
management, on health risks within the food chain; and
•	 examine the impacts of rising CO2 and climate change 
on human and livestock nutritional needs, as well as the 
impacts of changing nutritional sources on disease vulner­
ability.1

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
202
Supporting Evidence
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING CHAPTER
The chapter was developed through technical discussions 
of relevant evidence and expert deliberation by the report 
authors at several workshops, teleconferences, and email 
exchanges. The authors considered inputs and comments 
submitted by the public, the National Academies of Sciences, 
and Federal agencies. For additional information on the overall 
report process, see Appendices 2 and 3. The author team also 
engaged in targeted consultations during multiple exchanges 
with contributing authors, who provided additional expertise 
on subsets of the Traceable Accounts associated with each Key 
Finding.
Because the impacts of climate change on food production, 
prices, and trade for the United States and globally have 
been widely examined elsewhere, including in the most 
recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 this chapter focuses only on the impacts of 
climate change on food safety, nutrition, and distribution 
in the context of human health in the United States. Many 
nutritional deficiencies and food-related illnesses are of critical 
importance globally, particularly those causing diarrheal 
epidemics or mycotoxin poisoning, and affect U.S. interests 
abroad; but the primary focus of this chapter is to address 
climate impacts on the food safety concerns most important 
in the United States. Thus, the literature cited in this chapter 
is specific to the United States or of demonstrated relevance 
to developed countries. The placement of health threats from 
seafood was determined based on pre- and post-ingestion 
risks: while ingestion of contaminated seafood is discussed 
in this chapter, details on the exposure pathways of water-
related pathogens (for example, through recreational or 
drinking water) are discussed in Chapter 6: Water-Related 
Illness.
KEY FINDING TRACEABLE ACCOUNTS
Increased Risk of Foodborne Illness
Key Finding 1: Climate change, including rising temperatures 
and changes in weather extremes, is expected to increase 
the exposure of food to certain pathogens and toxins [Likely, 
High Confidence]. This will increase the risk of negative health 
impacts [Likely, Medium Confidence], but actual incidence of 
foodborne illness will depend on the efficacy of practices that 
safeguard food in the United States [High Confidence].  
Description of evidence base
Multiple lines of research have shown that changes in weather 
extremes, such as increased extreme precipitation (leading to 
flooding and runoff events), can result in increased microbial 
and chemical contamination of crops and water in agricultural 
environments, with increases in human exposure.55, 56, 72 During 
times of drought, plants become weaker and more susceptible 
to stress, which can result in mold growth and mycotoxin 
production if plants are held in warm, moist environments.32, 75
While studies that link climate change to specific outbreaks 
of foodborne illness are limited, numerous studies have 
documented that many microbial foodborne illnesses increase 
with increasing ambient temperature.18, 19 There is very strong 
evidence that certain bacteria grow more rapidly at higher 
temperatures and can increase the prevalence of pathogens 
and toxins in food.32, 34, 54 Case studies have demonstrated that 
lack of refrigerated storage, particularly during very warm 
weather, leads to increases in microbial growth and higher 
exposure to pathogens.5, 18, 19, 48, 60
Major uncertainties
Concentrations of pathogens and toxins in food are expected to 
increase, resulting in an increase in the risk of human exposure 
to infectious foodborne pathogens and toxins. However, the 
number or severity of foodborne illnesses due to climate change 
is uncertain. Much of this uncertainty is due to having controls 
in place to protect public health. For example, contaminated 
crops are likely to be destroyed before consumption, and 
certain pathogens in food, like mycotoxins, are highly regulated 
in the United States. Consequently, the extent of exposure 
and foodborne illness will depend on regulatory, surveillance, 
monitoring, and communication systems, and on how, and to 
what extent, climate change alters these adaptive capacities. 
Furthermore, for certain pathogens, it is not yet clear whether 
the impact of climate change on a pathogen will be positive 
or negative. For example, climate change could lead to fewer 
cases of norovirus infection in the winter, but worsening health 
outcomes are also possible due to elevated transmission of 
norovirus during floods. Similarly drought can reduce water 
quality, increase runoff, and increase pathogen concentration, 
but can also decrease the survivability of certain foodborne 
pathogens.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence 
There is high confidence that rising temperature and increases 
in flooding, runoff events, and drought will likely lead to 
increases in the occurrence and transport of pathogens in 
agricultural environments, which will increase the risk of food 
contamination and human exposure to pathogens and toxins. 
However, the actual prevalence of disease will depend on the 
response of regulatory systems and, for certain pathogens, the 
relative importance of multiple climate drivers with opposing 
impacts on exposure. Thus there is medium confidence that 
these impacts of climate change on exposure to pathogens and 
toxins will likely lead to negative health outcomes. There is a 
high confidence that the actual incidence of foodborne illness 
will depend on the efficacy of practices that safeguard food in 
the United States.

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
203
Chemical Contaminants in the Food Chain
Key Finding 2: Climate change will increase human 
exposure to chemical contaminants in food through several 
pathways [Likely, Medium Confidence]. Elevated sea surface 
temperatures will lead to greater accumulation of mercury 
in seafood [Likely, Medium Confidence], while increases in 
extreme weather events will introduce contaminants into the 
food chain [Likely, Medium Confidence]. Rising carbon dioxide 
concentrations and climate change will alter incidence and 
distribution of pests, parasites, and microbes [Very Likely, 
High Confidence], leading to increases in the use of pesticides 
and veterinary drugs [Likely, Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
There are a number of established pathways by which 
climate change will intensify chemical contaminants within 
the food chain. Multiple studies have shown that increases 
in ocean temperatures are likely to increase the potential 
for mercury exposure, likely due to the increased uptake 
and concentration of mercury in fish and mammals at 
higher metabolic rates associated with warmer ambient 
temperatures.28, 88, 89, 90 Another pathway includes extreme 
weather events, which can move chemical contaminants 
such as lead into agricultural fields and pastures (as well as 
into drinking or recreational water sources—see Chapter 6: 
Water-Related Illness).45, 46, 87 A final pathway is through rising 
minimum winter temperatures and longer growing seasons, 
which will very likely alter pest distribution and populations. 
A large body of literature shows that temperature, carbon 
dioxide (CO2) concentrations, and water availability are also 
likely to affect pest development, number of pest generations 
per year, changes in pest range, rate of infestation, and host 
plant and animal susceptibility.3, 50, 76, 96, 97 Empirical models 
and an analysis of long-term in situ data indicate that rising 
temperatures will result in increased pest pressures.100, 101, 
105 These changes are expected to result in increased use 
of pesticides,100, 102 which can lead to increased human 
exposure.86
Major uncertainties
Each of the pathways described in the evidence base has 
variable levels of uncertainty associated with each step of 
the exposure pathway.110 For all these pathways, projecting 
the specific consequences on human health in the Unites 
States is challenging, due to the variability in type of pathogen 
or contaminant, time and duration of exposures, individual 
sensitivity (for example, genetic predisposition) and individual 
or institutional adaptive capacity. While increasing exposure 
to chemicals will exacerbate potential health risks, the nature 
of those risks will depend on the specific epidemiological links 
between exposure and human health as well as availability 
and access to health services. Resulting incidence of illness will 
depend on the genetic predisposition of the person exposed, 
type of contaminant, and extent of exposure over time.86
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence 
Although it is likely that climate change will increase human 
exposure to chemical contaminants, the specific pathway(s) 
of exposure have varying levels of uncertainty associated 
with them and hence there is medium confidence regarding 
the overall extent of exposure. This chapter focuses on three 
such pathways. First, it is likely that elevated sea surface 
temperatures will result in increased bioaccumulation 
of mercury in seafood, but there is medium confidence 
regarding human illness because rates of accumulation and 
exposure vary according to the type of seafood ingested, 
and because of the role of varying individual sensitivity and 
individual or institutional adaptive capacity (particularly 
behavioral choices). Similarly, it is likely that extreme events 
will increase contaminants into agricultural soil and the 
food chain. However, there is medium confidence regarding 
exposure because the specific nature of the contaminant 
and the food source will vary, and because the extent of 
exposure will depend on risk management, communication 
of public health threats, and the effectiveness of regulatory, 
surveillance, and monitoring systems within the current food 
safety network. There is high confidence that it is very likely 
that rising CO2 and climate change will alter pest incidence 
and distribution. There is medium confidence that such 
changes in incidence and distribution are likely to increase 
chemical management and the use of veterinary drugs 
in livestock. However, in all these pathways, the specific 
consequences on human health in the Unites States are 
uncertain, due primarily to the variability in type of pathogen 
or contaminant, time and duration of exposures, individual 
sensitivity (for example, genetic predisposition), and 
individual or institutional adaptive capacity. 
Rising Carbon Dioxide Lowers Nutritional Value of Food
Key Finding 3: The nutritional value of agriculturally 
important food crops, such as wheat and rice, will decrease 
as rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide continue to 
reduce the concentrations of protein and essential minerals in 
most plant species [Very Likely, High Confidence].
Description of evidence base
The nutritional response of crops to rising carbon dioxide is 
well documented, particularly among C3 cereals such as rice 
and wheat, which make up the bulk of human caloric input. C3 
species are about 95% of all plant species and represent those 
species most likely to respond to an increase in atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations.
There is strong evidence and consensus that protein 
concentrations in plants strongly correlate with nitrogen 
concentrations. CO2-induced declines in nitrogen 
concentrations have been observed in nearly a hundred 
individual studies and several meta-analyses.16, 133, 137, 139, 140 A 
meta-analysis of the effect of CO2 on protein by crop covers 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
204
228 observations on wheat, rice, soybeans, barley and potato, 
134 and was recently repeated for the United States, Japan, 
and Australia,135 covering 138 mean observations on nitrogen/
protein in wheat, rice, peas, maize, and sorghum. There is very 
strong evidence that rising CO2 reduces protein content in non-
leguminous C3 crops, including wheat, rice, potato, and barley. 
There is also good agreement across studies that the ongoing 
increase in CO2 elevates the overall carbohydrate content in C3 
plants.16 
Another meta-analysis quantifies the role of increasing CO2 in 
altering the ionome (the mineral nutrient and trace element 
composition of an organism) of plants, including major 
crops.16 This meta-analysis of 7,761 observations indicates 
that increasing CO2 also significantly reduces the mineral 
concentrations (calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc, copper, sulfur, 
potassium, and phosphorus) in C3 plants, including grains and 
edible parts of other crops, while also substantially increasing 
the ratio of total non-structural carbohydrates (starch and 
sugars) to minerals and to protein.
Furthermore, these studies show the quality of current crops 
to be lower relative to the crops raised in the past with respect 
to protein and minerals.16, 134 Direct experimental evidence 
shows that protein concentrations in wheat flour progressively 
declined with rising CO2 concentrations representing levels 
in 1900 (approximately 290 ppm),  2008 (approximately 385 
ppm), and the CO2 concentrations projected to occur later in 
this century (approximately 715 ppm).129
Major uncertainties
While the general response and the direction in the change 
of crop quality is evident; there is uncertainty in the extent of 
variation in both protein and ionome among different crop 
varieties. There is little evidence regarding the CO2 effects 
on complex micronutrients such as carotenoids (vitamin A, 
lutein, and zeaxanthin). Although protein, micronutrients, and 
ratio of carbohydrates to protein are all essential aspects of 
human dietary needs, the projected human health impacts 
of nutritional changes with increasing CO2 are still being 
evaluated. There remains a high level of uncertainty regarding 
how reductions in crop quality affect human nutrition 
by contributing to or aggravating existing chronic dietary 
deficiencies and obesity risks, particularly in the United States 
where dietary protein deficiencies are uncommon.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Based on the evidence, there is high confidence that the 
rapid increase in atmospheric CO2 has resulted in a reduction 
in the level of protein and minerals relative to the amount of 
carbohydrates present for a number of important crop species 
(including a number of globally important cereals such as 
wheat, barley and rice), and will very likely continue to do so as 
atmospheric CO2 concentration continues to rise. 
Extreme Weather Limits Access to Safe Foods
Key Finding 4: Increases in the frequency or intensity of some 
extreme weather events associated with climate change 
will increase disruptions of food distribution by damaging 
existing infrastructure or slowing food shipments [Likely, 
High Confidence]. These impediments lead to increased risk 
for food damage, spoilage, or contamination, which will 
limit availability of and access to safe and nutritious food, 
depending on the extent of disruption and the resilience of 
food distribution infrastructure [Medium Confidence].
Description of evidence base
It is well documented in assessment literature that climate 
models project an increase in the frequency and intensity 
of some extreme weather events.14, 15 Because the food 
transportation system moves large volumes at a time, 
has limited alternative routes, and is dependent on the 
timing of the growing and harvest seasons, it is likely that 
the projected increase in the frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events13, 14 will also increase the frequency 
of food supply chain disruptions (including risks to food 
availability and access)147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 156 and the risk for 
food spoilage and contamination.152, 163 Recent extreme 
events have demonstrated a clear linkage to the disruption 
of food distribution and access.151, 161 Case studies show 
that such events, particularly those that result in power 
outages, may also expose food to temperatures inadequate 
for safe storage,152 with increased risk of illness. For example, 
New York City’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 
detected a statistically significant citywide increase in 
diarrheal illness resulting from consumption of spoiled foods 
due to lost refrigeration capabilities after a 2003 power 
outage.158
Major uncertainties
The extent to which climate-related disruptions to the food 
distribution system will affect food supply, safety, and human 
health, including incidences of illnesses, remains uncertain. 
This is because the impacts of any one extreme weather 
event are determined by the type, severity, and intensity 
of the event, the geographic location in which it occurs, 
infrastructure resiliency, and the social vulnerabilities or 
adaptive capacity of the populations at risk.
Assessment of confidence and likelihood based on evidence
Given the evidence base and current uncertainties, there is 
high confidence that projected increases in the frequency 
and severity of extreme events will likely lead to damage of 
existing food supplies and disruptions to food distribution 
infrastructure. There is medium confidence that these 
damages and disruptions will increase risk for food damage, 
spoilage, or contamination, which will limit availability and 
access to safe and nutritious foods because of uncertainties 
surrounding the extent of the disruptions and individual, 
community, or institutional sensitivity to impacts. There are 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
205
further uncertainties surrounding how the specific dynamics of 
the extreme event, such as the geographic location in which it 
occurs, as well as the social vulnerabilities or adaptive capacity 
of the populations at risk, will impact human health. 
DOCUMENTING UNCERTAINTY
See Appendix 4: Documenting Uncertainty for more 
information on assessments of confidence and likelihood used 
in this report. 
PHOTO CREDITS
Pg. 189–Farmer holding wheat: © Dan Lamont/Corbis
Pg. 190–Family enjoying outdoor grilling party: © Hill Street
           Studios/Blend Images/Corbis
Pg. 196–Helicopter crop dusting: © Lucas Payne/AgStock 
           Images/Corbis
Pg. 197–Farmer holding wheat: © Dan Lamont/Corbis
Confidence Level
Very High
Strong evidence (established 
theory, multiple sources, consistent 
results, well documented and 
accepted methods, etc.), high 
consensus
High
Moderate evidence (several sourc­
es, some consistency, methods 
vary and/or documentation limited, 
etc.), medium consensus
Medium
Suggestive evidence (a few sourc­
es, limited consistency, models 
incomplete, methods emerging, 
etc.), competing schools of thought
Low
Inconclusive evidence (limited 
sources, extrapolations, inconsis­
tent findings, poor documentation 
and/or methods not tested, etc.), 
disagreement or lack of opinions 
among experts
Likelihood
Very Likely
≥ 9 in 10
Likely
≥ 2 in 3
As Likely As Not
≈ 1 in 2
Unlikely
≤ 1 in 3
Very Unlikely
≤ 1 in 10

U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
206
References
1.	
Brown, M.E., J.M. Antle, P. Backlund, E.R. Carr, W.E. 
Easterling, M.K. Walsh, C. Ammann, W. Attavanich, C.B. 
Barrett, M.F. Bellemare, V. Dancheck, C. Funk, K. Grace, 
J.S.I. Ingram, H. Jiang, H. Maletta, T. Mata, A. Murray, M. 
Ngugi, D. Ojima, B. O’Neill, and C. Tebaldi, 2015: Climate 
Change, Global Food Security and the U.S. Food System. 
146 pp. U.S. Global Change Research Program. http://www.
usda.gov/oce/climate_change/FoodSecurity2015Assess­
ment/FullAssessment.pdf
2.	
Porter, J.R., L. Xie, A.J. Challinor, K. Cochrane, S.M. How­
den, M.M. Iqbal, D.B. Lobell, and M.I. Travasso, 2014: Food 
security and food production systems. Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sec­
toral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate 
Change. Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. 
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White, Eds. Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, 485-533.  http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/
assessment-report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5-Chap7_FINAL.pdf 
3.	
Chakraborty, S. and A.C. Newton, 2011: Climate change, 
plant diseases and food security: An overview. Plant 
Pathology, 60, 2-14.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
3059.2010.02411.x 
4.	
Gregory, P.J., J.S.I. Ingram, and M. Brklacich, 2005: Climate 
change and food security. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360, 2139-2148.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1745 
5.	
Lake, I.R., L. Hooper, A. Abdelhamid, G. Bentham, A.B.A. 
Boxall, A. Draper, S. Fairweather-Tait, M. Hulme, P.R. Hunt­
er, G. Nichols, and K.W. Waldron, 2012: Climate change 
and food security: Health impacts in developed countries. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 120, 1520-1526.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104424 
6.	
Walthall, C., P. Backlund, J. Hatfield, L. Lengnick, E. Mar­
shall, M. Walsh, S. Adkins, M. Aillery, E.A. Ainsworth, C. 
Amman, C.J. Anderson, I. Bartomeus, L.H. Baumgard, F. 
Booker, B. Bradley, D.M. Blumenthal, J. Bunce, K. Burkey, 
S.M. Dabney, J.A. Delgado, J. Dukes, A. Funk, K. Garrett, 
M. Glenn, D.A. Grantz, D. Goodrich, S. Hu, R.C. Izaurral­
de, R.A.C. Jones, S.-H. Kim, A.D.B. Leaky, K. Lewers, T.L. 
Mader, A. McClung, J. Morgan, D.J. Muth, M. Nearing, 
D.M. Oosterhuis, D. Ort, C. Parmesan, W.T. Pettigrew, W. 
Polley, R. Rader, C. Rice, M. Rivington, E. Rosskopf, W.A. 
Salas, L.E. Sollenberger, R. Srygley, C. Stöckle, E.S. Takle, 
D. Timlin, J.W. White, R. Winfree, L. Wright-Morton, and 
L.H. Ziska, 2012: Climate Change and Agriculture in the 
United States: Effects and Adaptation. USDA Technical Bul­
letin 1935, 186 pp. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Wash­
ington, 
D.C. 
http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/
effects_2012/CC%20and%20Agriculture%20Report%20
(02-04-2013)b.pdf
7.	
IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, 
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estra­
da, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. Mac­
Cracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (Eds.), 1132 pp. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, 
NY. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/
8.	
IOM, 2012: Improving Food Safety Through a One Health 
Approach: Workshop Summary. Choffnes, E.R., D.A. Relman, 
L. Olsen, R. Hutton, and A. Mack, Eds. Institute of Medi­
cine. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 418 
pp.  http://dx.doi.org/10.17226/13423 
9.	
Jaykus, L., M. Woolridge, J.M. Frank, M. Miraglia, A. 
McQuatters-Gollop, C. Tirado, R. Clarke, and M. Friel, 
2008: Climate Change: Implications for Food Safety. 49 pp. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/i0195e/i0195e00.HTM
10.	 FAO, 2014: Definitions of Purposes of the Codex Alimen­
tarius. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y2200e/y2200e07.
htm
11.	 CDC, 2014: CDC Estimates of Foodborne Illness in the 
United States. Centers for Disease Control and Preven­
tion, Atlanta, GA. http://www.cdc.gov/foodbornebur­
den/2011-foodborne-estimates.html

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
207
12.	 CDC, 2015: Food Safety: Foodborne Germs and  Illnesses. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 
http://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/foodborne-germs.html
13.	 IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and 
Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special 
Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmen­
tal Panel on Climate Change. Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. 
Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastran­
drea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and 
P.M. Midgley (Eds.), 582 pp. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY. http://ipcc-wg2.gov/
SREX/images/uploads/SREX-All_FINAL.pdf
14.	 IPCC, 2013: Summary for policymakers. Climate Change 
2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern­
mental Panel on Climate Change. Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, 
G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. 
Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley, Eds. Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, 1–30.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004 
15.	 Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, 
G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, M. Wehner, J. Willis, D. 
Anderson, S. Doney, R. Feely, P. Hennon, V. Kharin, T. 
Knutson, F. Landerer, T. Lenton, J. Kennedy, and R. Somer­
ville, 2014: Ch. 2: Our changing climate. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment. Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, 
Eds. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 19-67.  http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0KW5CXT 
16.	 Loladze, I., 2014: Hidden shift of the ionome of plants 
exposed to elevated CO2 depletes minerals at the base 
of human nutrition. eLife, 3, e02245.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7554/eLife.02245 
17.	 Curtis, D., A. Hill, A. Wilcock, and S. Charlebois, 2014: 
Foodborne and waterborne pathogenic bacteria in select­
ed Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Devel­
opment (OECD) countries. Journal of Food Science, 
79, R1871-R1876.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1750-
3841.12646 
18.	 Kovats, R.S., S.J. Edwards, S. Hajat, B.G. Armstrong, K.L. 
Ebi, and B. Menne, 2004: The effect of temperature on 
food poisoning: A time-series analysis of salmonellosis in 
ten European countries. Epidemiology and Infection, 132, 
443-453.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0950268804001992 
19.	 USDA, 2013: Foodborne Illness Peaks in Summer-Why? 
United States Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and 
Inspection Service. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/
fsis/topics/food-safety-education/get-answers/food-safety-
fact-sheets/foodborne-illness-and-disease/foodborne-illness-
peaks-in-summer/ct_index
20.	 Scallan, E., P.M. Griffin, F.J. Angulo, R.V. Tauxe, and R.M. 
Hoekstra, 2011: Foodborne illness acquired in the United 
States: Unspecified agents. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17, 
16-22.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.P21101 
21.	 Scallan, E., R.M. Hoekstra, F.J. Angulo, R.V. Tauxe, M.A. 
Widdowson, S.L. Roy, J.L. Jones, and P.M. Griffin, 2011: 
Foodborne illness acquired in the United States: Major 
pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17, 7-15.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.P11101 
22.	 Painter, J.A., R.M. Hoekstra, T. Ayers, R.V. Tauxe, C.R. 
Braden, F.J. Angulo, and P.M. Griffin, 2013: Attribution 
of foodborne illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths to food 
commodities by using outbreak data, United States, 1998–
2008. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 19, 407-415.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.3201/eid1903.111866 
23.	 Utaaker, K.S. and L.J. Robertson, 2015: Climate change 
and foodborne transmission of parasites: A consideration 
of possible interactions and impacts for selected parasites. 
Food Research International, 68, 16-23.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.06.051 
24.	 Pennotti, R., E. Scallan, L. Backer, J. Thomas, and F.J. 
Angulo, 2013: Ciguatera and scombroid fish poisoning 
in the United States. Foodborne Pathogens and Disease, 10, 
1059-1066.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/fpd.2013.1514 
25.	 Tchounwou, P.B., W.K. Ayensu, N. Ninashvili, and D. Sut­
ton, 2003: Review: Environmental exposure to mercury and 
its toxicopathologic implications for public health. Environ­
mental Toxicology, 18, 149-175.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
tox.10116 
26.	 Marques, A., M.L. Nunes, S.K. Moore, and M.S. Strom, 
2010: Climate change and seafood safety: Human health 
implications. Food Research International, 43, 1766-1779. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.02.010 
27.	 Downs, S.G., C.L. MacLeod, and J.N. Lester, 1998: Mer­
cury in precipitation and its relation to bioaccumulation in 
fish: A literature review. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 108, 
149-187.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/a:1005023916816 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
208
28.	 Booth, S. and D. Zeller, 2005: Mercury, food webs, and 
marine mammals: Implications of diet and climate change 
for human health. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113, 
521-526.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7603 
29.	 Boxall, A.B.A., A. Hardy, S. Beulke, T. Boucard, L. Burgin, 
P.D. Falloon, P.M. Haygarth, T. Hutchinson, R.S. Kovats, 
G. Leonardi, L.S. Levy, G. Nichols, S.A. Parsons, L. Potts, 
D. Stone, E. Topp, D.B. Turley, K. Walsh, E.M.H. Welling­
ton, and R.J. Williams, 2009: Impacts of climate change on 
indirect human exposure to pathogens and chemicals from 
agriculture. Environmental Health Perspectives, 117, 508-
514.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800084 
30.	 Strawn, L.K., E.D. Fortes, E.A. Bihn, K.K. Nightingale, 
Y.T. Gröhn, R.W. Worobo, M. Wiedmann, and P.W. Ber­
gholz, 2013: Landscape and meteorological factors affecting 
prevalence of three food-borne pathogens in fruit and veg­
etable farms. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 79, 
588-600.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.02491-12 
31.	 Liu, C., N. Hofstra, and E. Franz, 2013: Impacts of climate 
change on the microbial safety of pre-harvest leafy green veg­
etables as indicated by Escherichia coli O157 and Salmonel­
la spp. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 163, 119-
128.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.02.026 
32.	 Wu, F., D. Bhatnagar, T. Bui-Klimke, I. Carbone, R. 
Hellmich, G. Munkvold, P. Paul, G. Payne, and E. Takle, 
2011: Climate change impacts on mycotoxin risks in US 
maize. World Mycotoxin Journal, 4, 79-93.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3920/WMJ2010.1246 
33.	 Castro-Ibáñez, I., M.I. Gil, J.A. Tudela, and A. Allende, 
2015: Microbial safety considerations of flooding in prima­
ry production of leafy greens: A case study. Food Research 
International, 68, 62-69.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2014.05.065 
34.	 Lake, I.R., I.A. Gillespie, G. Bentham, G.L. Nichols, C. 
Lane, G.K. Adak, and E.J. Threlfall, 2009: A re-evaluation 
of the impact of temperature and climate change on food­
borne illness. Epidemiology and Infection, 137, 1538-1547. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0950268809002477 
35.	 Cook, D.W., 1994: Effect of time and temperature on mul­
tiplication of Vibrio vulnificus in postharvest Gulf Coast 
shellstock oysters. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
60, 3483-3484. PMC201838 
36.	 Gooch, J., A. DePaola, J. Bowers, and D. Marshall, 2002: 
Growth and survival of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in posthar­
vest American oysters. Journal of Food Protection, 65, 911-
1053.  
37.	 Paterson, R.R.M. and N. Lima, 2010: How will climate 
change affect mycotoxins in food? Food Research Inter­
national, 43, 1902-1914.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2009.07.010 
38.	 Lipp, E.K., R. Kurz, R. Vincent, C. Rodriguez-Palacios, S.R. 
Farrah, and J.B. Rose, 2001: The effects of seasonal vari­
ability and weather on microbial fecal pollution and enteric 
pathogens in a subtropical estuary. Estuaries, 24, 266-276. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1352950 
39.	 Kovats, R.S., M.J. Bouma, S. Hajat, E. Worrall, and A. 
Haines, 2003: El Niño and health. The Lancet, 362, 1481-
1489.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(03)14695-8 
40.	 Paz, S., N. Bisharat, E. Paz, O. Kidar, and D. Cohen, 2007: 
Climate change and the emergence of Vibrio vulnificus dis­
ease in Israel. Environmental Research, 103, 390-396.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2006.07.002 
41.	 Monge, R. and M. Chinchilla, 1996: Presence of Cryptospo­
ridium oocysts in fresh vegetables. Journal of Food Protection, 
59, 202-203.  
42.	 Solomon, E.B., S. Yaron, and K.R. Matthews, 2002: Trans­
mission of Escherichia coli O157:H7 from contaminated 
manure and irrigation water to lettuce plant tissue and its 
subsequent internalization. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 68, 397-400.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
aem.68.1.397-400.2002 
43.	 Sales-Ortells, H., X. Fernandez-Cassi, N. Timoneda, 
W. Dürig, R. Girones, and G. Medema, 2015: Health 
risks derived from consumption of lettuces irrigated with 
tertiary effluent containing norovirus. Food Research 
International, 68, 70-77.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2014.08.018 
44.	 Miraglia, M., H.J.P. Marvin, G.A. Kleter, P. Battilani, C. 
Brera, E. Coni, F. Cubadda, L. Croci, B. De Santis, S. Dek­
kers, L. Filippi, R.W.A. Hutjes, M.Y. Noordam, M. Pisante, 
G. Piva, A. Prandini, L. Toti, G.J. van den Born, and A. Ves­
permann, 2009: Climate change and food safety: An emerg­
ing issue with special focus on Europe. Food and Chemical 
Toxicology, 47, 1009-1021.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
fct.2009.02.005 
45.	 Foulds, S.A., P.A. Brewer, M.G. Macklin, W. Haresign, R.E. 
Betson, and S.M.E. Rassner, 2014: Flood-related contam­
ination in catchments affected by historical metal mining: 
An unexpected and emerging hazard of climate change. Sci­
ence of the Total Environment, 476-477, 165-180.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.12.079 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
209
46.	 Umlauf, G., G. Bidoglio, E.H. Christoph, J. Kampheus, F. 
Kruger, D. Landmann, A.J. Schulz, R. Schwartz, K. Severin, 
B. Stachel, and D. Stehr, 2005: The situation of PCDD/
Fs and dioxin-like PCBs after the flooding of River Elbe 
and Mulde in 2002. Acta Hydrochimica et Hydrobiologica, 
33, 543-554.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/aheh.200400597 
47.	 Rotkin-Ellman, M., G. Solomon, C.R. Gonzales, L. 
Agwaramgbo, and H.W. Mielke, 2010: Arsenic contam­
ination in New Orleans soil: Temporal changes associated 
with flooding. Environmental Research, 110, 19-25.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2009.09.004 
48.	 Kim, Y.S., K.H. Park, H.S. Chun, C. Choi, and G.J. 
Bahk, 2015: Correlations between climatic conditions and 
foodborne disease. Food Research International, 68, 24-30. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.03.023 
49.	 Lal, A., S. Hales, N. French, and M.G. Baker, 2012: Sea­
sonality in human zoonotic enteric diseases: A systematic 
review. PLoS ONE, 7, e31883.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0031883 
50.	 Pérez de León, A.A., P.D. Teel, A.N. Auclair, M.T. Mes­
senger, F.D. Guerrero, G. Schuster, and R.J. Miller, 2012: 
Integrated strategy for sustainable cattle fever tick eradica­
tion in USA is required to mitigate the impact of global 
change. Frontiers in Physiology, 3, Article 195.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3389/fphys.2012.00195 
51.	 Baranyi, J. and M.L. Tamplin, 2004: ComBase: A common 
database on microbial responses to food environments. Jour­
nal of Food Protection, 67, 1967-1971.  
52.	 Oscar, T.P., 2009: Predictive model for survival and growth 
of Salmonella typhimurium DT104 on chicken skin during 
temperature abuse. Journal of Food Protection, 72, 304-314.  
53.	 CDC, 2014: Salmonella: Multistate Outbreak of Multi­
drug-Resistant Salmonella Heidelberg Infections Linked to 
Foster Farms Brand Chicken (Final Update), July 31, 2014. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 
http://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/heidelberg-10-13/index.
html
54.	 Ravel, A., E. Smolina, J.M. Sargeant, A. Cook, B. Mar­
shall, M.D. Fleury, and F. Pollari, 2010: Seasonality in 
human salmonellosis: Assessment of human activities and 
chicken contamination as driving factors. Foodborne Patho­
gens and Disease, 7, 785-794.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
fpd.2009.0460 
55.	 Rose, J.B., P.R. Epstein, E.K. Lipp, B.H. Sherman, S.M. 
Bernard, and J.A. Patz, 2001: Climate variability and 
change in the United States: Potential impacts on water- 
and foodborne diseases caused by microbiologic agents. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 109 Suppl 2, 211-221. 
PMC1240668 
56.	 Semenza, J.C., S. Herbst, A. Rechenburg, J.E. Suk, C. Hös­
er, C. Schreiber, and T. Kistemann, 2012: Climate change 
impact assessment of food- and waterborne diseases. Critical 
Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 42, 857-
890.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2010.534706 
57.	 Rohayem, J., 2009: Norovirus seasonality and the poten­
tial impact of climate change. Clinical Microbiology and 
Infection, 15, 524-527.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
0691.2009.02846.x 
58.	 McLaughlin, J.B., A. DePaola, C.A. Bopp, K.A. Martinek, 
N.P. Napolilli, C.G. Allison, S.L. Murray, E.C. Thompson, 
M.M. Bird, and J.P. Middaugh, 2005: Outbreak of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus gastroenteritis associated with Alaskan oys­
ters. The New England Journal of Medicine, 353, 1463-1470. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa051594 
59.	 Martinez-Urtaza, J., J.C. Bowers, J. Trinanes, and A. 
DePaola, 2010: Climate anomalies and the increasing risk 
of Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus illnesses. 
Food Research International, 43, 1780-1790.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.04.001 
60.	 Cook, D.W., 1997: Refrigeration of oyster shellstock: Con­
ditions which minimize the outgrowth of Vibrio vulnificus. 
Journal of Food Protection, 60, 349-352.  
61.	 Kunkel, K.E., L.E. Stevens, S.E. Stevens, L. Sun, E. Janssen, 
D. Wuebbles, and J.G. Dobson, 2013: Regional Climate 
Trends and Scenarios for the U.S. National Climate Assess­
ment: Part 9. Climate of the Contiguous United States. 
NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 142-9, 85 pp. U.S. 
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmo­
spheric Administration, National Environmental Satellite, 
Data, and Information Service, Washington, D.C. http://
www.nesdis.noaa.gov/technical_reports/NOAA_NESDIS_
Tech_Report_142-9-Climate_of_the_Contiguous_Unit­
ed_States.pdf
62.	 Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, Eds., 2014: 
Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, D.C., 842 pp.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
210
63.	 Polley, L. and R.C.A. Thompson, 2009: Parasite zoonoses 
and climate change: Molecular tools for tracking shifting 
boundaries. Trends in Parasitology, 25, 285-291.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2009.03.007 
64.	 Mills, J.N., K.L. Gage, and A.S. Khan, 2010: Potential 
influence of climate change on vector-borne and zoonotic 
diseases: A review and proposed research plan. Environ­
mental Health Perspectives, 118, 1507-1514.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.0901389 
65.	 Esteve-Gassent, M.D., A.A. Pérez de León, D. Rome­
ro-Salas, T.P. Feria-Arroyo, R. Patino, I. Castro-Arellano, G. 
Gordillo-Pérez, A. Auclair, J. Goolsby, R.I. Rodriguez-Vi­
vas, and J.G. Estrada-Franco, 2014: Pathogenic landscape of 
transboundary zoonotic diseases in the Mexico–US border 
along the Rio Grande. Frontiers in Public Health, 2, 177. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2014.00177 
66.	 Schijven, J., M. Bouwknegt, A.M. de Roda Husman, S. 
Rutjes, B. Sudre, J.E. Suk, and J.C. Semenza, 2013: A deci­
sion support tool to compare waterborne and foodborne 
infection and/or illness risks associated with climate change. 
Risk Analysis, 33, 2154-2167.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
risa.12077 
67.	 Patz, J.A., S.J. Vavrus, C.K. Uejio, and S.L. McLellan, 
2008: Climate change and waterborne disease risk in the 
Great Lakes region of the US. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 35, 451-458.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ame­
pre.2008.08.026 
68.	 Tornevi, A., O. Bergstedt, and B. Forsberg, 2014: Precipita­
tion effects on microbial pollution in a river: Lag structures 
and seasonal effect modification. PloS ONE, 9, e98546. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0098546 
69.	 Cho, K.H., Y.A. Pachepsky, J.H. Kim, A.K. Guber, D.R. 
Shelton, and R. Rowland, 2010: Release of Escherichia coli 
from the bottom sediment in a first-order creek: Experiment 
and reach-specific modeling. Journal of Hydrology, 391, 322-
332.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2010.07.033 
70.	 Jamieson, R., D.M. Joy, H. Lee, R. Kostaschuk, and R. Gor­
don, 2005: Transport and deposition of sediment-associated 
Escherichia coli in natural streams. Water Research, 39, 2665-
2675.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2005.04.040 
71.	 Jamieson, R.C., D.M. Joy, H. Lee, R. Kostaschuk, and R.J. 
Gordon, 2005: Resuspension of sediment-associated Esche­
richia coli in a natural stream. Journal of Environment Qual­
ity, 34, 581-589.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2134/jeq2005.0581 
72.	 Fleury, M., D.F. Charron, J.D. Holt, O.B. Allen, and A.R. 
Maarouf, 2006: A time series analysis of the relationship of 
ambient temperature and common bacterial enteric infec­
tions in two Canadian provinces. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 50, 385-391.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-006-0028-9 
73.	 Senhorst, H.A. and J.J. Zwolsman, 2005: Climate change 
and effects on water quality: A first impression. Water Sci­
ence & Technology, 51, 53-59.  
74.	 Zhang, G., L. Ma, L.R. Beuchat, M.C. Erickson, V.H. Phel­
an, and M.P. Doyle, 2009: Heat and drought stress during 
growth of lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) does not promote inter­
nalization of Escherichia coli O157: H7. Journal of Food Pro­
tection, 72, 2471-2475.  
75.	 Cotty, P.J. and R. Jaime-Garcia, 2007: Influences of climate 
on aflatoxin producing fungi and aflatoxin contamination. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 119, 109-115. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.07.060 
76.	 Tirado, M.C., R. Clarke, L.A. Jaykus, A. McQuatters-Gol­
lop, and J.M. Frank, 2010: Climate change and food safe­
ty: A review. Food Research International, 43, 1745-1765. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.07.003 
77.	 Medina, A., A. Rodriguez, and N. Magan, 2014: Effect 
of climate change on Aspergillus flavus and aflatoxin B1 
production. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00348 
78.	 Gould, L.H., K.A. Walsh, A.R. Vieira, K. Herman, I.T. 
Williams, A.J. Hall, and D. Cole, 2013: Surveillance for 
foodborne disease Outbreaks — United States, 1998–2008. 
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 62, 1-34. 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6202a1.
htm
79.	 Gingold, D.B., M.J. Strickland, and J.J. Hess, 2014: Cigua­
tera fish poisoning and climate change: Analysis of National 
Poison Center Data in the United States, 2001–2011. Envi­
ronmental Health Perspectives, 122, 580-586.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1307196 
80.	 Akil, L., H.A. Ahmad, and R.S. Reddy, 2014: Effects of 
climate change on Salmonella infections. Foodborne Patho­
gens and Disease, 11, 974-980.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
fpd.2014.1802 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
211
81.	 Strosnider, H., E. Azziz-Baumgartner, M. Banziger, R. Bhat, 
R. Breiman, M. Brune, K. DeCock, A. Dilley, J. Groopman, 
K. Hell, S. Henry, D. Jeffers, C. Jolly, J. P, G. Kibata, L. 
Lewis, X. Liu, G. Luber, L. McCoy, P. Mensah, M. Miraglia, 
A. Misore, H. Njapau, C. Ong, M. Onsongo, S. Page, D. 
Park, M. Patel, T. Phillips, M. Pineiro, J. Pronczuk, H. Rog­
ers, C. Rubin, M. Sabino, A. Schaafsma, G. Shephard, J. 
Stroka, C. Wild, J. Williams, and D. Wilson, 2006: Work­
group report: Public health strategies for reducing aflatox­
in exposure in developing countries. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114, 1898-1903.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.9302 http://www.jstor.org/stable/4119604 
82.	 Lewis, L., M. Onsongo, H. Njapau, H. Schurz-Rogers, G. 
Luber, S. Kieszak, J. Nyamongo, L. Backer, A.M. Dahiye, 
A. Misore, K. DeCock, and C. Rubin, 2005: Aflatoxin con­
tamination of commercial maize products during an out­
break of acute aflatoxicosis in eastern and central Kenya. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 113, 1763-1767.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7998 
83.	 Wild, C.P. and Y.Y. Gong, 2010: Mycotoxins and human 
disease: A largely ignored global health issue. Carcinogenesis, 
31, 71-82.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgp264 
84.	 Liu, Y. and F. Wu, 2010: Global burden of aflatoxin-in­
duced hepatocellular carcinoma: A risk assessment. Envi­
ronmental Health Perspectives, 118, 818-824.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.0901388 
85.	 Battilani, P., V. Rossi, P. Giorni, A. Pietri, A. Gualla, H.J. 
Van der Fels-Klerx, C.J.H. Booij, A. Moretti, A. Logrieco, 
F. Miglietta, P. Toscano, M. Miraglia, B. De Santis, and C. 
Brera, 2012: Modelling, Predicting and Mapping the Emer­
gence of Aflatoxins in Cereals in the EU due to Climate 
Change. Question No. EFSA-Q-2009-00812. European 
Food Safety Authority, Parma, Italy. http://www.efsa.euro­
pa.eu/sites/default/files/scientific_output/files/main_docu­
ments/223e.pdf
86.	 Alavanja, M.C.R., M.K. Ross, and M.R. Bonner, 2013: 
Increased cancer burden among pesticide applicators and 
others due to pesticide exposure. CA: A Cancer Journal 
for Clinicians, 63, 120-142.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3322/
caac.21170 
87.	 Presley, S.M., T.R. Rainwater, G.P. Austin, S.G. Platt, J.C. 
Zak, G.P. Cobb, E.J. Marsland, K. Tian, B. Zhang, T.A. 
Anderson, S.B. Cox, M.T. Abel, B.D. Leftwich, J.R. Hud­
dleston, R.M. Jeter, and R.J. Kendall, 2006: Assessment 
of pathogens and toxicants in New Orleans, LA following 
Hurricane Katrina. Environmental Science & Technology, 40, 
468-474.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es052219p 
88.	 Carrie, J., F. Wang, H. Sanei, R.W. Macdonald, P.M. Out­
ridge, and G.A. Stern, 2010: Increasing contaminant bur­
dens in an arctic fish, Burbot (Lota lota), in a warming 
climate. Environmental Science & Technology, 44, 316-322. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es902582y 
89.	 Bodaly, R.A., J.W.M. Rudd, R.J.P. Fudge, and C.A. Kel­
ly, 1993: Mercury concentrations in fish related to size of 
remote Canadian shield lakes. Canadian Journal of Fish­
eries and Aquatic Sciences, 50, 980-987.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1139/f93-113 
90.	 Dijkstra, J.A., K.L. Buckman, D. Ward, D.W. Evans, M. 
Dionne, and C.Y. Chen, 2013: Experimental and natural 
warming elevates mercury concentrations in estuarine fish. 
PLoS ONE, 8, e58401.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0058401 
91.	 Pack, E.C., C.H. Kim, S.H. Lee, C.H. Lim, D.G. Sung, 
M.H. Kim, K.H. Park, S.-S. Hong, K.M. Lim, D.W. Choi, 
and S.W. Kim, 2014: Effects of environmental temperature 
change on mercury absorption in aquatic organisms with 
respect to climate warming. Journal of Toxicology and Envi­
ronmental Health, Part A, 77, 1477-1490.  http://dx.doi.org
/10.1080/15287394.2014.955892 
92.	 González-Estecha, M., A. Bodas-Pinedo, M.A. Rubio-Her­
rera, N. Martell-Claros, E.M. Trasobares-Iglesias, J.M. 
Ordóñez-Iriarte, J.J. Guillén-Pérez, M.A. Herráiz-Martínez, 
J.A. García-Donaire, R. Farré-Rovira, E. Calvo-Manuel, 
J.R. Martínez-Álvarez, M.T. Llorente-Ballesteros, M. Sáinz-
Martín, T. Martínez-Astorquiza, M.J. Martínez-García, I. 
Bretón Lesmes, M.A. Cuadrado-Cenzual, S. Prieto-Men­
chero, C. Gallardo-Pino, R. Moreno-Rojas, P. Bermejo-Bar­
rera, M. Torres-Moreno, M. Arroyo-Fernández, and A. 
Calle-Pascual, 2014: Effectos sobre la salud del metilmer­
curio in ninos y adultos: Estudios nacionales e internacio­
nales [The effects of methylmercury on health in children 
and adults: National and international studies]. Nutricion 
Hospitalaria, 30, 989-1007.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3305/
nh.2014.30.5.7728 
93.	 Bebber, D.P., 2015: Range-expanding pests and patho­
gens in a warming world. Annual Review of Phytopatholo­
gy, 53, 335-356.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phy­
to-080614-120207 
94.	 Sanchez-Guillen, R.A., A. Cordoba-Aguilar, B. Hansson, 
J. Ott, and M. Wellenreuther, 2015: Evolutionary conse­
quences of climate-induced range shifts in insects. Biological 
Reviews, July 6.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/brv.12204 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
212
95.	 Bale, J.S. and S.A.L. Hayward, 2010: Insect overwintering 
in a changing climate. Journal of Experimental Biology, 213, 
980-994.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/jeb.037911 
96.	 Rosenzweig, C., A. Iglesias, X.B. Yang, P.R. Epstein, and E. 
Chivian, 2001: Climate change and extreme weather events: 
Implications for food production, plant diseases, and pests. 
Global Change and Human Health, 2, 90-104.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1023/a:1015086831467 
97.	 Ziska, L.H. and G.B. Runion, 2007: Future weed, pest, and 
disease problems for plants. Agroecosystems in a Changing 
Climate. Newton, P.C.D., R.A. Carran, G.R. Edwards, and 
P.A. Niklaus, Eds. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 261-287. 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/60100500/
csr/ResearchPubs/runion/runion_07a.pdf
98.	 Zavala, J.A., C.L. Casteel, E.H. DeLucia, and M.R. Beren­
baum, 2008: Anthropogenic increase in carbon dioxide com­
promises plant defense against invasive insects. PNAS, 105, 
5129-5133.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800568105 
99.	 O’Neill, B.F., A.R. Zangerl, E.H. DeLucia, C. Casteel, J.A. 
Zavala, and M.R. Berenbaum, 2011: Leaf temperature of 
soybean grown under elevated CO2 increases Aphis gly­
cines (Hemiptera: Aphididae) population growth. Insect 
Science, 18, 419-425.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-
7917.2011.01420.x 
100.	 Chen, C.-C. and B.A. McCarl, 2001: An investigation 
of the relationship between pesticide usage and climate 
change. Climatic Change, 50, 475-487.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/a:1010655503471 
101.	 Ziska, L.H., 2014: Increasing minimum daily temperatures 
are associated with enhanced pesticide use in cultivated soy­
bean along a latitudinal gradient in the Mid-Western United 
States. PLoS ONE, 9, e98516.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0098516 
102.	 Ziska, L.H., J.R. Teasdale, and J.A. Bunce, 1999: Future 
atmospheric carbon dioxide may increase tolerance to gly­
phosate. Weed Science, 47, 608-615.  
103.	 Ziska, L.H., S. Faulkner, and J. Lydon, 2004: Changes in 
biomass and root:shoot ratio of field-grown Canada thistle 
(Cirsium arvense), a noxious, invasive weed, with elevated 
CO2: Implications for control with glyphosate. Weed Science, 
52, 584-588.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1614/WS-03-161R 
104.	 McDonald, A., S. Riha, A. DiTommaso, and A. DeGaeta­
no, 2009: Climate change and the geography of weed dam­
age: Analysis of U.S. maize systems suggests the potential for 
significant range transformations. Agriculture, Ecosystems & 
Environment, 130, 131-140.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2008.12.007 
105.	 Manea, A., M.R. Leishman, and P.O. Downey, 2011: Exot­
ic C4 grasses have increased tolerance to glyphosate under 
elevated carbon dioxide. Weed Science, 59, 28-36.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1614/ws-d-10-00080.1 
106.	 Ziska, L.H., 2011: Climate change, carbon dioxide and 
global crop production: Food security and uncertainty. 
Handbook on Climate Change and Agriculture. Dinar, A. and 
R. Mendelsohn, Eds. Edward Elgar Publishing, Chelten­
ham, United Kingdom, 9-31.  
107.	 DiTommaso, A., Q. Zhong, and D.R. Clements, 2014: 
Identifying climate change as a factor in the establishment 
and persistence of invasive weeds in agricultural crops. Inva­
sive Species and Global Climate Change. Ziska, L.H. and J.S. 
Dukes, Eds. CABI Books, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, UK, 
253-270.  
108.	 Ziska, L.H. and L.L. McConnell, 2015: Climate change, 
carbon dioxide, and pest biology: Monitor, mitigate, man­
age. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.  http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/jf506101h 
109.	 Bailey, S.W., 2004: Climate change and decreasing herbi­
cide persistence. Pest Management Science, 60, 158-162. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ps.785 
110.	 Delcour, I., P. Spanoghe, and M. Uyttendaele, 2015: Lit­
erature review: Impact of climate change on pesticide 
use. Food Research International, 68, 7-15.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.09.030 
111.	 WHO, 2014: Antimicrobial Resistance: Global Report on 
Surveillance. 257 pp. World Health Organization, Gene­
va. http://www.who.int/drugresistance/documents/surveil­
lancereport/en/
112.	 Cooper, K.M., C. McMahon, I. Fairweather, and C.T. 
Elliott, 2015: Potential impacts of climate change on veter­
inary medicinal residues in livestock produce: An island of 
Ireland perspective. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 44, 
21-35.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2014.03.007 
113.	 Gormaz, J.G., J.P. Fry, M. Erazo, and D.C. Love, 2014: Pub­
lic health perspectives on aquaculture. Current Environmen­
tal Health Reports, 1, 227-238.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s40572-014-0018-8 

7–FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION, AND DISTRIBUTION
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
213
114.	 Lafferty, K.D., J.W. Porter, and S.E. Ford, 2004: Are diseas­
es increasing in the ocean? Annual Review of Ecology, Evolu­
tion, and Systematics, 35, 31-54.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.ecolsys.35.021103.105704 
115.	 Karvonen, A., P. Rintamäki, J. Jokela, and E.T. Valtonen, 
2010: Increasing water temperature and disease risks 
in aquatic systems: Climate change increases the risk of 
some, but not all, diseases. International Journal for Para­
sitology, 40, 1483-1488.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpa­
ra.2010.04.015 
116.	 Bhaskaram, P., 2002: Micronutrient malnutrition, infec­
tion, and immunity: An overview. Nutrition Reviews, 60, 
S40-S45.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1301/00296640260130722 
117.	 Ezzati, M., A.D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, S. Vander Hoorn, and 
C.J.L. Murray, 2002: Selected major risk factors and glob­
al and regional burden of disease. The Lancet, 360, 1347-
1360.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(02)11403-6 
118.	 Kennedy, G., G. Nantel, and P. Shetty, 2003: The scourge 
of “hidden hunger”: Global dimensions of micronutri­
ent deficiencies. Food Nutrition and Agriculture 32, 8-16. 
ftp://193.43.36.93/docrep/fao/005/y8346m/y8346m01.
pdf
119.	 Kaidar-Person, O., B. Person, S. Szomstein, and R.J. Rosen­
thal, 2008: Nutritional deficiencies in morbidly obese 
patients: A new form of malnutrition? Obesity Surgery, 18, 
1028-1034.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11695-007-9350-
5 
120.	 Stein, A.J., 2010: Global impacts of human mineral mal­
nutrition. Plant and Soil, 335, 133-154.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-009-0228-2 
121.	 Gibson, R.S., 2012: Zinc deficiency and human health: Eti­
ology, health consequences, and future solutions. Plant and 
Soil, 361, 291-299.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-
012-1209-4 
122.	 Fulgoni, V.L., D.R. Keast, R.L. Bailey, and J. Dwyer, 2011: 
Foods, fortificants, and supplements: Where do Americans 
get their nutrients? Journal of Nutrition, 141, 1847-1854. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.111.142257 
123.	 Song, Y., S.W. Leonard, M.G. Traber, and E. Ho, 2009: Zinc 
deficiency affects DNA damage, oxidative stress, antioxidant 
defenses, and DNA repair in rats. Journal of Nutrition, 139, 
1626-1631.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.109.106369 
124.	 Flancbaum, L., S. Belsley, V. Drake, T. Colarusso, and E. 
Tayler, 2006: Preoperative nutritional status of patients 
undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbid obesity. 
Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery, 10, 1033-1037.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gassur.2006.03.004 
125.	 Kimmons, J.E., H.M. Blanck, B.C. Tohill, J. Zhang, and 
L.K. Khan, 2006: Associations between body mass index 
and the prevalence of low micronutrient levels among US 
adults. Medscape General Medicine, 8, 59. PMC1868363 
126.	 Lopez-Ridaura, R., W.C. Willett, E.B. Rimm, S. Liu, M.J. 
Stampfer, J.E. Manson, and F.B. Hu, 2004: Magnesium 
intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women. 
Diabetes Care, 27, 134-140.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2337/
diacare.27.1.134 
127.	 Conroy, J.P., 1992: Influence of elevated atmospheric CO2 
concentrations on plant nutrition. Australian Journal of Bot­
any, 40, 445-456.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/bt9920445 
128.	 Manderscheid, R., J. Bender, H.J. Jäger, and H.J. Weigel, 
1995: Effects of season long CO2  enrichment on cereals. 
II. Nutrient concentrations and grain quality. Agriculture, 
Ecosystems & Environment, 54, 175-185.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0167-8809(95)00602-o 
129.	 Ziska, L.H., C.F. Morris, and E.W. Goins, 2004: Quanti­
tative and qualitative evaluation of selected wheat varieties 
released since 1903 to increasing atmospheric carbon diox­
ide: Can yield sensitivity to carbon dioxide be a factor in 
wheat performance? Global Change Biology, 10, 1810-1819. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2004.00840.x 
130.	 Högy, P. and A. Fangmeier, 2008: Effects of elevated atmo­
spheric CO2 on grain quality of wheat. Journal of Cere­
al Science, 48, 580-591.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcs.2008.01.006 
131.	 Högy, P. and A. Fangmeier, 2009: Atmospheric CO2  enrich­
ment affects potatoes: 2. Tuber quality traits. European Jour­
nal of Agronomy, 30, 85-94.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
eja.2008.07.006 
132.	 Fernando, N., J. Panozzo, M. Tausz, R.M. Norton, N. 
Neumann, G.J. Fitzgerald, and S. Seneweera, 2014: Elevat­
ed CO2  alters grain quality of two bread wheat cultivars 
grown under different environmental conditions. Agricul­
ture, Ecosystems & Environment, 185, 24-33.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.agee.2013.11.023 
